STP/RTP
              overlapping




DR election and
              priority


Auto-RP




L3VPNs (PE with DR/RP in
              VRF, pe, pd)


BSR




GRES


Anycast RP







Note
Any security issue is a high availability issue. For instance,
        from a security standpoint, spoofed messages with different Gen_IDs
        could result in a DoS attack. To prevent these issues, JUNOS software
        limits how quickly join and prune messages can be received.

There are many different ways to deliver multicast traffic.
      Choosing a particular approach depends on the mix of the network devices
      being used in a particular network segment, the device control, customer
      versus provider segmentation, and many other political issues. Since the
      support for GR is not equally implemented across all equipment models, software versions, and
      vendors, network designers must evaluate all the choices and feature
      support before enabling GR PIM protocol extensions.














Non-Stop Active Routing



Having a highly available routing node in the middle of your network running
    GRES with two REs is a great way to build a core
    infrastructure supporting seven 9s network uptime. The problem is that
    ensuring a zero-loss environment requires GRES to be supplemented with GR
    protocol extensions on all running protocols on all surrounding routers.
    This is easily done in the core network, where you have the control of
    platform selection, protocol support, and software version. However, that
    is not the case at the edge of the network, where you face
    customer-controlled devices. More often than not, you do not know the
    hardware type or software versions and protocol support of your customer
    peering routers. Moreover, even if you do know, you cannot control their
    hardware and software selection. Thus, you cannot rely on GR protocol
    extensions to integrate seamlessly into your node redundancy design with
    GRES.
A provider also cannot always rely on network-based availability by
    means of redundant network paths toward the customer. Often, the customer
    is dual-homed to different service providers for better redundancy. It is
    most likely that catastrophic events, such as a natural disaster, will not
    affect different service providers in the same manner. While one ISP might
    lose portions of its data center and upstream peerings, another ISP might
    be located far away from the disaster site and will be able to preserve
    all routing state with the rest of the Internet.
Additionally, you do not want your customers to have any idea that
    your router has gone through a failure event at all. You'd really prefer
    to provide as little negative information about your network to your
    customers as you possibly can.
All of these reasons create a strong case for a different
    implementation of high availability on edge devices. Non-Stop Active
    Routing (NSR) is the perfect solution, not only for the edge of the
    network, but also for the core. With its seamless work in the background,
    NSR should be used wherever applicable. Figure 4-6 shows a network
    design based on high availability tools.









Figure 4-6. Network design based on high availability tools






Implementation Details and Configs



NSR is a relatively new software feature available in JUNOS,
      included since the JUNOS 8.4 release on platforms with dual REs. The
      basic concept of NSR is that the backup RE can maintain all peering
      relationships with its neighbors during an RE switchover event, without
      the help of protocol extensions such as GR. While NSR takes care of
      routing protocols, forwarding redundancy is still built on the concept
      of GRES. Therefore, to provide minimal traffic loss, GRES must be
      supported and configured in addition to NSR.
The backup RE provides support for NSR by actively running an
      RPD process. The aim is that the RPD on the backup RE is
      initially in sync with the primary RPD and in sync with the rest of the
      network afterward. Figure 4-7
      illustrates the NSR state replication process.









Figure 4-7. NSR state replication process


During the initial startup of the RPD process on the backup RE,
      all routing state from the primary RE is copied by means of rtsock messages using TCP. The private routing
      instance _private_instance is used as
      a means of RPD replication, ensuring that the RPD on the backup RE does
      not start routing from the null state. This routing instance also
      prevents delays in updates, because the backup RPD might have to wait
      for a long time for all neighbors' states to be refreshed. Certain
      protocols never readvertise their routing information to neighbors
      unless specifically requested, with the result that the backup RE
      remains out of sync with the rest of the world.
Once the RPD is up and running and all of its routing information
      is populated in the relevant tables, it actively snoops on all incoming
      and outgoing protocol messages. Moreover, it processes all incoming
      messages, and adds routes to or removes routes from the backup routing
      table as needed. During this process, the RPD resolves next hop
      information as needed, just as the primary RPD does. The RPD also snoops
      all locally generated messages from the primary RE to its neighbors.
      Therefore, the backup RE does not keep its state up-to-date with the
      primary RE. Rather, it keeps its state up-to-date with the rest of the
      network.
With NSR, the forwarding state and active kernel state are
      replicated the same way they are replicated in GRES: using the ksyncd daemon, which provides Non-Stop
      Forwarding (NSF) support.
To configure NSR support, use the following command:

[edit]
lab@r1# set routing-options nonstop-routing
As stated earlier, NSR is closely tied to GRES and uses GRES for
      NSF support. Thus, you must configure GRES as well:

[edit]
lab@r1# show chassis 
chassis {
    redundancy {
        routing-engine 0 master;
        routing-engine 1 backup;
        failover {
            on-loss-of-keepalives;
            on-disk-failure;
        }
        graceful-switchover;
    }
    routing-engine {
        on-disk-failure reboot;
    }
}

Because both of the REs have the same configuration, you do not
      need to enable commit synchronization. In earlier releases, omitting
      the commit synchronize
      statement would generate a reminder to use the commit synchronize command for all commits. To
      avoid potentially forgetting to use this command, you must include the
      actual command in the router configuration file, and then each time you
      execute a commit command, JUNOS executes the commit synchronize command:

{master}[edit]
lab@r1# set system commit ?   
Possible completions:
synchronize          Synchronize commit on both Routing Engines by default
{master}[edit]
lab@r1# set system commit synchronize 



NSR and GR Helpers
NSR and GR extensions are mutually exclusive, and you cannot configure them
        together.
The primary goal of NSR is to have the router rebuild its
        routing and forwarding information without any impact on the actual
        forwarding and routing. In an ideal scenario, no neighbors would
        discover that the router has rebooted.
The goal of NSR conflicts with the primary goal of the GR
        extensions, which is to alert all the neighbors that the router is
        restarting and needs help from the neighbors. It is a request to
        neighbors not to drop protocol adjacency and to help rebuild the lost
        routing table.
If you attempt to configure both NSR and GR, JUNOS displays a
        warning message:

[edit]
lab@r1# show routing-options
##
## Warning: Graceful restart and Nonstop routing may not be enabled simultaneously
##
graceful-restart;
Even though you may imagine a scenario in which not all routers
        can run NSR, but are capable of running GRES with GR, the fact is that
        all protocols capable of GR are also capable of being GR helpers
        without any extra configuration steps. As noted earlier in this
        chapter, they are all helpers by default.

To verify and troubleshoot NSR, use the following command:

{master}[edit]
lab@r1# run show task replication    
        Stateful Replication: Enabled
        RE mode: Master

    Protocol                Synchronization Status
    IS-IS                   Complete              

{master}[edit]
lab@r1# 

Also execute show route, show bgp
      neighbor, show ospf database, and similar
      commands, and compare the output.
The reason network engineers have jobs is that not everything
      works as expected. Sometimes the problem is a deficiency in the system;
      however, often the issue is that our expectations are not aligned with
      the intended design goal of the JUNOS feature.

Note
"Unlike great literature, routing protocol functionality is not
        subject to personal interpretation." — Matthew Shaul, 2001

Because JUNOS supports traceoptions in many
      portions of the configuration, you might expect to find something
      similar for NSR support. In fact, you can turn on the nsr flag under traceoptions in all major protocols:

[edit]
lab@r1# set protocols isis traceoptions flag nsr-synchronization detail














Non-Stop Bridging



While most of the Juniper-deployed infrastructure on the Internet provides only routing
    functionality, more and more networks are deploying Juniper gear for
    switching purposes as well. Having a highly available switch is as
    important as the router. The bottom line is that networks provide only a
    medium for bits and bytes to move across. The failure of the forwarding
    card or control plane on the switch or the router has the same, unpleasant
    effect on the network. Therefore, it is necessary to provide some sort of
    system resilience for switches as well. JUNOS does it with the concept of
    Non-Stop Bridging (NSB), which, at the time of writing, is available only
    on the MX platforms. NSB is equivalent to NSR in the bridging world. The
    goal of NSB is to provide support for control plane failures while
    maintaining the forwarding state and keeping all neighbors blissfully in
    the dark about any failure. None of the Layer 2 control protocols should
    be able to detect the failure of the neighboring switch. The
    under-the-hood infrastructure of this concept is very similar to the NSR
    infrastructure.




Implementation Details and Configurations



NSB relies heavily on GRES for its forwarding state maintenance. As described in
      the previous section, kernel entries must be copied from the primary RE
      to the secondary RE. However, in this case, kernel entries contain
      Media Access Control (MAC) addresses and their respective
      next hops. Nevertheless, the replication process is the same.
      The ksyncd daemon is
      responsible for this replication. Once you configure GRES on the router
      in the chassis redundancy hierarchy, ksyncd is initialized on the backup RE and
      syncs up all of its state, including next hops with the primary RE. This
      replication takes care of keeping the forwarding state intact during the
      switchover.
However, to maintain the control plane replication, a different
      daemon is used. In the MX Series, all Layer 2 functionality is managed by the l2cpd process.
      Therefore, all the Layer 2 control protocols as well as the state
      replication are managed similarly to the
      way the RPD manages all routing management information and
      replication between primary and secondary REs. This daemon ensures that
      all Layer 2 protocol states stay intact during the switchover and
      afterward. Figure 4-8 shows
      the NSB state replication process.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, to configure NSB, you must
      also configure GRES to ensure that the forwarding redundancy is
      replicated and routing protocols stay active. Then configure NSB:

{master}[edit]
lab@r1# set protocols layer2-control nonstop-bridging
As with everything in our network field, things don't always work
      as expected. To verify the replication state and further troubleshoot
      the problem, use the following command:

lab@r1# run show l2cpd task replication
        Stateful Replication: Disabled









Figure 4-8. The NSB state replication process
















Choosing Your High Availability Control Plane Solution



From the high availability perspective, among all the redundancy implementations
    discussed in this chapter, NSR and NSB are the two best choices: they
    provide full standalone routing, switching, and forwarding redundancy. In
    the event of a control plane failure, traffic continues to flow, and no
    neighbors observe any change in control protocol maintenance.
However, because we all have multivendor network environments, and
    not all features are supported on all platforms or software versions, we
    have to assess each design separately to find the optimal redundancy
    solution. Because of tight protocol interaction, we must analyze each
    network requirement separately, and based on supported software and
    platforms, use some or all of the available high availability. Table 4-3 lists the JUNOS
    release support requirement information needed for you to make these
    choices.


Table 4-3. High availability redundancy implementations












Platform


GRES


GR


NSR


NSB






T640


5.6


5.6


9.0


N/A




M320


6.0


6.0


9.0


N/A




M120


8.4


8.4


9.0


N/A




M10/7


6.0


6.0


9.6


N/A




J Series


8.4


8.4


10.0


N/A




MX Series


8.4


8.4


9.2


9.0



















Chapter 5. Virtualization for High Availability



Picture this: you have just left a meeting with the CTO. During the
  meeting, you were informed that, by order of the CFO, there is no more
  money, but your customer support manager says the company must improve
  customer satisfaction statistics by increasing, and most importantly
  delivering, higher uptime levels in customer service-level agreements
  (SLAs). Everyone is looking at you to deliver service improvements with
  empty pockets.
Regardless of your particular business, you have a single goal: to
  provide reliable access to information. Whether you are in charge of a
  purpose-built enterprise data center or collocation facilities selling data
  access, specific uptime levels are defined in your customers' SLAs. While
  99.9% uptime was an acceptable measure of reliability a decade ago, the
  increased importance of mission-critical information demands even higher
  availability. Many of today's network deployments require an uptime of
  99.999%, commonly referred to as "five 9s" of availability. Some networks
  have even more stringent requirements, approaching an uptime of 99.99999%,
  or "seven 9s" of availability.
This chapter discusses how the consolidation of resources can improve your network's high availability. Why
  consolidate? The bottom line is that having fewer devices in your network
  results in fewer opportunities for potential errors and hence in fewer
  failures. Here are a few specific reasons for consolidation:



Ease of management


Reducing the number of devices that IT must manage lowers
        network complexity, yielding increased availability through more
        uptime and greater operational efficiency, as well as through
        increased productivity. The result is a reduction in operational expenses (OPEX) and a decrease in Mean Time
        Between Failure (MTBF) averages.


Power and cooling efficiency


Having fewer devices reduces the probability of power failure,
        resulting in increased availability. The decrease in power consumption
        is directly proportional to a decrease in cooling costs.


Scalable growth


Consolidating resources allows for future controlled network
        growth that is both cost-effective and space-efficient.



While there is ongoing discussion about the best consolidation technologies to use in the data
  center—iSCSI, Fiber Channel (FC), FC over Ethernet, and InfiniBand
  are examples of various technological concepts—they all have the same goal:
  consolidation of operating resources.
A key component to successful consolidation of IT resources
  is virtualization, the combining of
  multiple network functions and/or components into a single, usually software-based, administrative entity. All the
  applications being delivered by next-generation data centers have only two needs:
  access to CPU and I/O. Technology has evolved significantly such that the
  old concept of a single data center server has been replaced with many
  virtual entities that access portions of allocated resources. While most
  virtualization focuses on servers, databases, email, storage, and even
  end-user client components, we cannot
  ignore the infrastructure component based around network resource virtualization.
This chapter covers two different, but important, scenarios of network
  resource virtualization: virtualization of the low-end switching control plane by EX Series switches that are used for host connectivity in data centers,
  and virtualization of the high-end routing control plane by T Series routers that are used in the core routing domain and in remote
  mega-Point of Presence (POP) locations. Both types of virtualization are part of the data
  center infrastructure, but each operates at a different network
  layer.













Virtual Chassis in the Switching Control Plane



The Juniper EX Series is the newest addition to the Juniper routing and
    switching portfolio. Lower-end models include the EX3200 and EX4200
    series; the EX8200 series are larger switches. The EX3200 and EX4200 are
    stackable switches targeted as a solution for data centers, campuses, and
    branch office deployments. As we discussed in Chapter 2, each switch runs JUNOS software
    and has a routing engine (RE). With these low-end switches, you can
    create Virtual Chassis (VCs) of up to 10
    switches to provide high availability of network resources. VC technology
    allows the RE on one of the switches in the group to manage all the
    other switches in the stack. The RE uses proven technologies, such as
    Graceful Routing Engine Switchover (GRES), Non-Stop Active Routing (NSR), and Non-Stop Bridging
    (NSB), to fully manage and operate the rest of the switches in
    the stack. These other line card switches have their own Packet Forwarding
    Engine (PFE) containing proprietary switching application-specific
    integrated circuits (ASICs).
Figure 5-1 illustrates a VC composed of stackable
    switches.









Figure 5-1. VC stack


As you can see in Figure 5-1, five switches are
    stacked together and joined by a VC backplane connection. This stack
    provides the equivalent throughput of a 128 Gbps high-speed backplane. The
    switches are connected using VC cables that can create a stack or ring
    topology. We discuss different VC connectivity design methods later in
    this chapter. VC cables can be up to 3 feet long. Member switches can also
    interconnect through the switch's standard 1GE or 10GE uplink ports, which
    increases the distance between the switches in a single chassis. Using
    long-range (LR) optics with these uplinks, there can be up to 1 km between
    individual switch chassis, so a single VC can span up to 10 km. Note that
    1/10GE uplink ports that are dedicated to providing intermember chassis
    connectivity can no longer be used as regular Ethernet ports because they
    are running an internal JUNOS protocol, Trivial Network Protocol
    (TNP). This is the same protocol used on other Juniper equipment
    for communication between the RE and the PFE. In the VC, TNP carries all
    the data along the interchassis links.
Each switch in a VC is a member of that chassis. The methodology of
    master and backup REs that is used on other Juniper equipment is also applied
    in the VC world. Because each switch has its own built-in RE, any of the
    10 switches is eligible to become a master RE through the election
    process. From the switches that do not become the master, a single switch
    is elected as the backup RE. The rest of the switches function like line
    cards. The VC in Figure 5-1 has one master, one backup,
    and three line cards. Using the JUNOS command-line interface (CLI), you
    see that all switches appear as Flexible PIC Concentrators (FPCs),
    starting with FPC 0. As you can see in
    the following output, one of the FPCs (here, FPC 0) is the
    master and the other (FPC 1) is the
    backup. The remaining three switches are also listed in the output as
    FPCs, starting with FPC 2, and
    with the role of line card:

lab@s1> show virtual-chassis status 

Virtual Chassis ID: 0019.e257.3d80
                                       Mastership           Neighbor List  
Member ID Status Serial No    Model      priority  Role     ID  Interface
0 (FPC 0) Prsnt  BQ0208138247 ex4200-48p      255  Master*   1  vcp-0      
                                                             1  vcp-1      
1 (FPC 1) Prsnt  BR0208211823 ex4200-24f      255  Backup    0  vcp-0      
                                                             0  vcp-1 
2 (FPC 2) Prsnt  BR0208211213 ex4200-24f      128  Linecard  0  vcp-0      
                                                             0  vcp-1 
3 (FPC 3) Prsnt  BR0208218363 ex4200-24f      128  Linecard  0  vcp-0      
                                                             0  vcp-1
4 (FPC 4) Prsnt  BR0208217183 ex4200-24f      128  Linecard  0  vcp-0      
                                                             0  vcp-1 
 
   
Member ID for next new member: 5 (FPC 5)

You can remotely manage the entire VC in two ways: either through the console of any of the
    five VC members, or by using a single Ethernet management interface,
    called a VME, which is manually assigned an IP address. Regardless of the
    point of entry, console or Ethernet, all roads lead to the master RE. Once
    you are connected to the VC, all the switch ports are accessible through
    the CLI.
The master RE manages all control plane protocols for the line
    cards. The routing and forwarding tables created on the master RE are
    pushed down to all the VC line cards by means of TNP updates, which is the
    same method used by other Juniper chassis, as described in Chapter 4.
VCs also support the same high availability control plane features
    as other Juniper equipment. A VC can use GRES and NSR for control plane
    failures. Then, if the master RE fails, a backup RE takes over and the
    rest of the line cards continue to forward the traffic. VCs also support
    In-Service Software Upgrade (ISSU), which allows each line
    card to be upgraded during regular operating hours rather than during a
    maintenance window. These features allow a properly designed and
    configured EX Series VC to provide a reliability of five 9s.




VC Roles



A VC is created by connecting 2 or more (up to 10) switches and
      then configuring them as though they were a single chassis. By default,
      one switch in the VC takes the role of master switch, acting as the
      brain for all other members of the chassis. This role is identical to
      the role of master RE on other Juniper routing platforms. The master
      switch runs all routing and switching daemons and runs chassisd to manage the
      other VC members. Using its replication daemon, the kernel on the master
      switch pushes its forwarding entries to the backup switch and to the
      rest of the line cards as needed.
The backup switch is "the sleeping brain," having the role of
      backup RE. Depending on the high availability tool set you are using,
      the backup can be totally asleep, as is the case with GRES and Graceful Restart (GR), or it can be actively listening, as
      in the case of NSR and NSB. In both scenarios, the backup switch is waiting to
      take over control of the entire VC if the master switch fails.
The rest of the member switches are in line card mode, in which
      they act as dumb devices and simply forward traffic based on routing and
      forwarding table entries created on the master switch. If the master or
      backup switch fails, one of the line card switches is elected as the
      next backup switch.





IDs for VCs



Each set of switches connected in a VC has the same VC identifier (ID) value to signal
      membership in that particular VC. The following CLI output shows how to
      display the VC ID:

lab@s1> show virtual-chassis status
Virtual Chassis ID: 0000.e255.00e0
Mastership Neighbor List
Member ID Status Serial No Model Priority Role ID Interface
0 (FPC 0) Prsnt abc123 ex4200-48p 255 Master* 1 vcp-0
                             2 vcp-1
1 (FPC 1) Prsnt def456 ex4200-24t 255 Backup 2 vcp-0
                             0 vcp-1
2 (FPC 2) Prsnt abd231 ex4200-24p 128 Linecard 0 vcp-0
                             1 vcp-1
Each switch also has a member ID, which is a unique identifier
      within that VC. By default, a switch in standalone mode is assigned a
      member ID of 0. When the switch joins a chassis group and is used in VC
      mode, a nonzero member ID is assigned to the switch. The first switch to
      join the VC has a member ID of 0, the second switch that joins is
      assigned a member ID of 1, and so forth. The assigned member ID value is
      sticky and is retained even after the switch leaves the VC group. For
      example, if the member IDs in a three-switch VC are set in order, 0, 1,
      and 2, if Switch 1 fails and is replaced with another switch, the new
      switch is assigned a member ID of 4 and the ID of 1 remains unused. You
      can clear the member ID manually with the following command:

lab@s1> request virtual-chassis renumber member—id 4 new-member—id 1
While you can leave the default member IDs unchanged, it is a good
      practice to pay attention to the ID values and manually modify them as
      necessary, because they play a significant role in the VC mastership
      election process.





Priorities and the Election Process



While you can easily slap together and connect switches to create
      a VC that works in your network, it is better to go the extra mile and
      plan the VC configuration beforehand and check that the
      configuration is working properly. As always, planning is better for
      high availability than not planning.
When you boot the switches in a VC, the following steps determine
      the master RE:



The member with the highest mastership priority value becomes
          the master VC.


If the mastership priority values are equal, the member that
          was the master the last time the VC booted becomes the
          master.


If there is no record of a previous master, the member that
          has been part of the VC the longest becomes the master.


If several chassis have been part of the VC for the same
          amount of time, the member with the lowest Media Access Control
          (MAC) address becomes the master.







How to rig an election



Each switch is assigned a mastership priority value between 1 and 255,
        and the switch with the highest value is elected master. By default,
        all switches are assigned a value of 128. While you could configure
        one switch with 200, configure another with 150, and leave the rest of
        the switches to the default of 128, this setup is not recommended. The
        mastership ownership is preemptive, so once the original master comes
        back online after a failure, it takes back the VC mastership because
        of its higher priority, which may disrupt VC operations.

Note
To prevent mastership preemption, it is best to configure both
          master and backup REs with priorities of 255 and leave the rest of
          the switches with the default value. Because membership uptime
          within the VC is also relevant, you should power on the master
          switch first and configure its priority; then power up and configure
          the backup switch, and finally bring up the rest of the line card
          switches.







Basic VC Setup and Configuration



Let's verify the most basic setup of a VC consisting of two member
      switches. The members are connected using VC ports (VCPs) over proprietary Juniper cable, as shown in Figure 5-2.









Figure 5-2. VC connection


As recommended earlier, power on the intended master first because
      this guarantees the default assigned priorities, therefore making the
      switch a master. After the second switch is online, the VC should be
      working with the correct mastership assignment, as you can check from
      the CLI:

lab@s1> show virtual-chassis status

Virtual Chassis ID: 0019.e257.3d80
                                          Mastership       Neighbor List
Member ID  Status Serial No    Model      priority  Role   ID  Interface
0 (FPC 0)  Prsnt  BQ0208138247 ex4200-48p      128  Master*  1  vcp-0
                                                             1  vcp-1
1 (FPC 1)  Prsnt  BR0208211823 ex4200-24f      128  Backup   0  vcp-0
                                                             0  vcp-1

Member ID for next new member: 2 (FPC 2)

{master}
lab@s1> show virtual-chassis vc-port all-members
fpc0:
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Interface        Type             Status
or
PIC / Port
vcp-0            Dedicated        Up
vcp-1            Dedicated        Up

fpc1:
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Interface        Type             Status
or
PIC / Port
vcp-0            Dedicated        Up
vcp-1            Dedicated        Up

{master}
lab@s1>
You see that both switches are present and that Switch 0 has been
      chosen to be the master of this VC. Because it was the first switch to
      come online, its member ID is 0 and it is referred to as FPC 0. You also see that both VC cables are in
      the "up" state and are being used for VC connectivity. In this case, you
      need only one cable because the connection runs in full duplex (FD)
      mode. However, using a second cable provides redundancy.
To guarantee that Switch 0 is always the master switch, change its
      priority to 255:

lab@s1# set virtual-chassis member 0 mastership-priority 255
To prevent mastership preemption after Switch 0 restarts or its
      hardware is replaced, change the mastership priority of Switch 1 as
      well:

lab@s1# set virtual-chassis member 1 mastership-priority 255

lab@s1# commit
fpc0:
configuration check succeeds
fpc1:
commit complete
fpc0:
commit complete
To verify the changes, which ensures that the proper mastership
      election occurs the next time the VC boots up, use the following
      commands:

lab@s1> show virtual-chassis member-config
fpc0:
---------------------------------------------------------------------

  Member ID:           0
  Mastership priority: 255

fpc1:
----------------------------------------------------------------------

  Member ID:           1
  Mastership priority: 255

lab@s1> show virtual-chassis status

Virtual Chassis ID: 0019.e257.3d80
                                       Mastership          Neighbor List
Member ID Status Serial No    Model      priority  Role    ID  Interface
0 (FPC 0) Prsnt  BQ0208138247 ex4200-48p      255  Master*  1  vcp-0
                                                            1  vcp-1
1 (FPC 1) Prsnt  BR0208211823 ex4200-24f      255  Backup   0  vcp-0
                                                              0  vcp-1

Member ID for next new member: 2 (FPC 2)
When you add more switches to the VC, they all have a line card
      role and the default mastership priority of 128:

lab@s1> show virtual-chassis status

Virtual Chassis ID: 0019.e257.3d80
                                     Mastership           Neighbor List
Member ID Status Serial No    Model    priority  Role     ID  Interface
0 (FPC 0) Prsnt  BQ0208138247 ex4200-48p    255  Master*   1  vcp-0
                                                           1  vcp-1
1 (FPC 1) Prsnt  BR0208211823 ex4200-24f    255  Backup    0  vcp-0
                                                           0  vcp-1
2 (FPC 2) Prsnt  BR0208211213 ex4200-24f    128  Linecard  0  vcp-0
                                                           0  vcp-1
3 (FPC 3) Prsnt  BR0208218363 ex4200-24f    128  Linecard  0  vcp-0
                                                           0  vcp-1

Member ID for next new member: 4 (FPC 4)





Eliminating Loops Within the VC



At this point, you may be wondering about potential loops across the VCP intermember
      links. Since Juniper recommends creation of a VC ring topology, we are
      in fact creating a loop by default. This is OK. For redundancy purposes,
      you should be connecting VCPs in a ring topology as we described
      earlier in this chapter. So, how do we solve the issue of looping within
      the virtual backplane? Simply stated, this is not a problem the user has
      to solve. EX switches use a proprietary modification of the Intermediate
