
Applying a Pattern brush
In this section, you'll apply the Border Pattern brush to a rectangular border around the artwork. As you've seen, when you use drawing tools to apply brushes to artwork, you first draw the path with the drawing tool, and then select the brush in the Brushes panel to apply the brush to the path.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. With the Selection tool () selected, click the white stroke of the rectangle on the border.
3. In the Tools panel, click the Fill box and make sure that None () is selected. Then click the Stroke box and select None ().
4. With the rectangle selected, click the Border brush in the Brushes panel.

5. Choose Select > Deselect.
The rectangle is painted with the Border brush, with the side tile on the sides and the outer-corner tile on each corner.

Editing the Pattern brush
Now you'll edit the Border brush using a pattern swatch that you create.


 Tip
For more information on creating pattern swatches, see "About patterns" in Illustrator Help.

1. Click the Swatches panel icon () to expand the Swatches panel, or choose Window > Swatches.
2. Choose View > Pattern objects to zoom in to the life preserver off the right edge of the artboard.
3. With the Selection tool (), drag the life preserver into the Swatches panel. The new pattern swatch appears in the Swatches panel.

After you create a pattern brush, you can delete the pattern swatches from the Swatches panel, if you don't plan to use them for additional artwork.
4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. In the Swatches panel, double-click the pattern swatch that you just created. In the Pattern Options dialog box, name the swatch Corner and choose 1 x 1 from the Copies menu.

6. Click Done in the gray bar, along the top of the Document window, to finish editing the pattern.
7. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
8. In the Brushes panel, double-click the Border Pattern brush to open the Pattern Brush Options dialog box.


 Tip
You can also change the pattern tiles in a Pattern brush by pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and dragging artwork from the artboard onto the tile of the Pattern brush you wish to change in the Brushes panel.

9. Click the Outer Corner Tile box, and choose the Corner pattern swatch from the menu that appears (you'll need to scroll). Change the Scale to 70%, and click OK. The figure shows choosing the outer-corner tile.
10. In the dialog box that appears, click Apply To Strokes to update the border on the artboard.

11. With the Selection tool selected, click to select one of the paths that contains a row of windows. Click the Border brush in the Brushes panel to apply it.

 Note
Earlier in the lesson, you learned how to remove a brush from an object by clicking the Remove Brush Stroke button () in the Brushes panel. In this case, you chose Edit > Undo Apply Pattern Brush instead, because clicking the Remove Brush Stroke button would strip the previous formatting from the path, leaving it with a default fill and stroke.

Notice that the life preservers are not applied to the path. The path is painted with the side tile from the Border brush. Because the path does not include sharp corners, outer-corner and inner-corner tiles are not applied to the path.
12. Choose Edit > Undo Apply Pattern Brush to remove the brush from the path.
13. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Working with the Blob Brush tool
You can use the Blob Brush tool () to paint filled shapes that intersect and merge with other shapes of the same color. With the Blob Brush tool, you can draw with Paintbrush tool artistry. Unlike the Paintbrush tool, which lets you create open paths, the Blob Brush tool lets you create a closed shape with a fill only (no stroke) that you can then easily edit with the Eraser or Blob Brush tool. Shapes that have a stroke cannot be edited with the Blob Brush tool.



Drawing with the Blob Brush tool
Next, you'll use the Blob Brush tool to create part of a cloud.


1. Click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to expand the Layers panel. Click the eye icon () to the left of the Ship layer to hide the contents of the layer. Click the Background layer to select it.
2. Change the Fill color to the swatch named "Light Blue," and change the Stroke color to None () in the Control panel.
When drawing with the Blob Brush tool, if a fill and stroke are set before drawing, the stroke becomes the fill of the shape made by the Blob Brush tool. If only a fill is set before drawing, it becomes the fill of the shape created.
3. Click and hold down on the Paintbrush tool () in the Tools panel and select the Blob Brush tool. Double-click the Blob Brush tool in the Tools panel. In the Blob Brush Tool Options dialog box, select the Keep Selected option and change the Size to 70 pt in the Default Brush Options area. Click OK.

4. Position the pointer to the left of the little blue cloud in the sky. Drag to create a cloud shape that doesn't touch the little cloud to the right of it (see the figure).


 Tip
You can also change the Blob Brush size by pressing the right bracket key ( ] ) or left bracket key ( [ ) several times to increase or decrease the size of brush.

When you draw with the Blob Brush tool, you create filled, closed shapes. Those shapes can contain any type of fill, including gradients, solid colors, patterns, and more. Notice that the Blob Brush pointer has a circle around it before you begin painting. That circle indicates the size of the brush (70 pt, which you set in the previous step).

Merging paths with the Blob Brush tool
In addition to drawing new shapes with the Blob Brush tool, you can use it to intersect and merge shapes of the same color. Objects merged with the Blob Brush tool need to have the same appearance attributes, have no stroke, be on the same layer or group, and be adjacent to each other in the stacking order.


 Note
To learn more about Blob Brush tool guidelines, search for "Painting with fills and strokes" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help). On that Help page, go to the section titled "Draw and merge paths with the Blob Brush tool."

Next, you will merge the cloud you just created with the little cloud to the right of it to create one big cloud.
1. Choose Select > Deselect.
2. With the Blob Brush tool () selected, drag from inside the cloud shape you created to the inside of the little cloud to the right, connecting the two shapes.


 Note
In the figure, the cloud you drew has a blue outline. You may not see that, and that's okay.


 Note
If you find that the shapes are not merging, it may be that they have different strokes and fills. You can select both the cloud you created and the small cloud with the Selection tool (), and ensure that the Fill color is the light blue swatch and the stroke is None, in the Control panel. Then you can select the Blob Brush tool and try dragging from one cloud to the other.

3. Continue drawing with the Blob Brush tool to make the two clouds look more like a single cloud.
If you find that new shapes are being made instead of the existing cloud shape being edited, undo what you've created. Then, with the Selection tool (), reselect and deselect the cloud shape and continue.
4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Editing with the Eraser tool
As you draw and merge shapes with the Blob Brush tool, you may draw too much and want to edit what you've done. You can use the Eraser tool () in combination with the Blob Brush tool to mold the shape and to correct any changes you don't like.


 Tip
As you draw with the Blob Brush and Eraser tools, it is recommended that you use shorter strokes and release the mouse button often. You can undo the edits that you make, but if you draw in one long stroke without releasing the mouse button, an undo removes the entire stroke.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the cloud shape.
Selecting the shape(s) before erasing limits the Eraser tool to erasing only the selected shape(s).
2. Double-click the Eraser tool () in the Tools panel. In the Eraser Tool Options dialog box, change the Size to 40 pt, and click OK.

3. Position the pointer over the edge of the cloud shape and, with the Eraser tool, drag along the bottom of the cloud shape to remove some of it. Try switching between the Blob Brush tool and the Eraser tool to edit the cloud.
The Blob Brush and Eraser tools both have pointers that include a circle, indicating the diameter of the brush.

4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. Click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to expand the Layers panel, if necessary. Click the visibility columns to the left of all of the sublayers to ensure that they are all showing. Click to select the main layer named "Mask" at the top of the Layers panel. Click the Make/Release Clipping Mask button () at the bottom of the Layers panel.

By clicking the Make/Release Clipping Mask button, you are taking an existing rectangle shape and using it to mask content. To learn more about masking, see Lesson 14, "Using Illustrator CC with Other Adobe Applications."
6. Click the Layers panel tab to collapse the panel group.
7. Choose Object > Show All to show some poster text.
8. Choose Select > Deselect.
9. Choose File > Save, and close all open files.


Review questions
1. What is the difference between applying a brush to artwork using the Paintbrush tool () and applying a brush to artwork using one of the drawing tools?

2. Describe how artwork in an Art brush is applied to content.
3. Describe how to edit paths with the Paintbrush tool as you draw. How does the Keep Selected option affect the Paintbrush tool?
4. What must be done to a raster image in order for it to be used in certain brushes?
5. For which brush types must you have artwork selected on the artboard before you can create a brush?
6. What does the Blob Brush tool () allow you to create?

Review answers
1. When painting with the Paintbrush tool (), if a brush is chosen in the Brushes panel and you draw on the artboard, the brush is applied directly to the paths as you draw. To apply brushes using a drawing tool, you select the tool and draw in the artwork. Then you select the path in the artwork and choose a brush in the Brushes panel. The brush is applied to the selected path.

2. An Art brush is made from artwork (vector or embedded raster). When you apply an Art brush to the stroke of an object, the artwork in the Art brush, by default, is stretched along the selected object stroke.
3. To edit a path with the Paintbrush tool, drag over a selected path to redraw it. The Keep Selected option keeps the last path selected as you draw with the Paintbrush tool. Leave the Keep Selected option selected when you want to easily edit the previous path as you draw. Deselect the Keep Selected option when you want to draw layered paths with the paintbrush without altering previous paths. When Keep Selected is deselected, you can use the Selection tool () to select a path and then edit it.
4. In order to be used in certain brushes (Art, Pattern, and Scatter), a raster image must be embedded.
5. For Art and Scatter brushes, you need to have artwork selected in order to create a brush using the New Brush button () in the Brushes panel.
6. Use the Blob Brush tool () to edit filled shapes that you can intersect and merge with other shapes of the same color or to create artwork from scratch.







11. Exploring Creative Uses of Effects and Graphic Styles

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Work with the Appearance panel.
• Edit and apply appearance attributes.
• Copy, disable and enable, and remove appearance attributes.
• Reorder appearance attributes.
• Apply and edit an effect.
• Apply a variety of effects.
• Save and apply an appearance as a graphic style.
• Apply a graphic style to a layer.
• Scale strokes and effects.

This lesson takes approximately 60 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



You can change the look of an object without changing its structure simply by applying attributes, such as fills, strokes, and effects, from the Appearance panel. And because the effects themselves are live, they can be modified or removed at any time. This allows you to save the appearance attributes as graphic styles and apply them to another object.


Getting started
In this lesson, you'll change the appearance of artwork using the Appearance panel, various effects, and graphic styles. Before you begin, you'll need to restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator. Then you'll open a file containing the finished artwork to see what you'll create.


 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See "Getting Started" at the beginning of the book.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.
2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.

 Note
On Windows, if you see a message that refers to a "compatible GPU," click OK.

3. Choose File > Open, and open the L11_end.ai file in the Lesson11 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.
This file displays a completed illustration of a flyer for a music event.


 Note
You will need an Internet connection to sync the font.

4. In the Missing Fonts dialog box that most likely will appear, click Sync Fonts to sync all of the missing fonts from the FranklinGothicURW-Hea family to your computer. After it is synced and you see the message stating that there are no more missing fonts, click Close.

If you can't get the fonts to sync (a "Syncing Typekit fonts..." message doesn't go away), you can go to the Creative Cloud desktop application and choose Assets > Fonts to see what the issue may be (refer to the section "Changing font family and font style" in Lesson 7, "Adding type to a Poster," for more information on how to resolve it).
You can also just click Close in the Missing Fonts dialog box and ignore the missing fonts as you proceed. A third method is to click the Find Fonts button in the Missing Fonts dialog box and replace the fonts with a local font on your machine. You can also go to Help (Help > Illustrator Help) and search for "Find missing fonts."
5. Choose View > Zoom Out to make the finished artwork smaller. Adjust the window size, and leave it on your screen as you work. (Use the Hand tool [] to move the artwork where you want it in the window.) If you don't want to leave the image open, choose File > Close.
To begin working, you'll open an existing art file.

 Note
For more help on resolving the missing font, refer to the previous steps.

6. Choose File > Open, and open the L11_start.ai file in the Lesson11 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.

The L11_start.ai file uses the same FranklinGothicURW-Hea font as the L11_end.ai file. If you synced the font once, you don't need to do it again. If you didn't open the L11_end.ai file, then the Missing Fonts dialog box will most likely will appear for this step. Click Sync Fonts to sync all of the missing fonts from the FranklinGothicURW-Hea family to your computer. After it is synced and you see the message stating that there are no more missing fonts, click Close.

 Note
In Mac OS, when opening lesson files, you may need to click the round, green button in the upper-left corner of the Document window to maximize the window's size.

7. Choose File > Save As, name the file JazzFestival.ai, and select the Lesson11 folder. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and then click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.
8. Choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher in the Application bar to reset the workspace.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the workspace switcher menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.


Using the Appearance panel
An appearance attribute is an aesthetic property—such as a fill, stroke, transparency, or effect—that affects the look of an object but does not affect its basic structure. Up to this point, you've been changing these appearance attributes in the Control panel, Swatches panel, and more. These attributes and more (effects, opacity, and more) can also be found in the Appearance panel for selected artwork.

1. Click the Appearance panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to see the Appearance panel.

 Note
Depending on your operating system, the selection color of objects (the bounding box) may be different colors, and that's okay.

2. Select the Selection tool (), and click to select the largest of the shapes that make up the trumpet. The Appearance panel shows what the object is (a Path) and the appearance attributes applied to it (Stroke, Fill, and Opacity, as well as a Drop Shadow effect).

The different options available in the Appearance panel are described below:


A. Selected object and thumbnailB. Attribute rowC. Visibility columnD. Link to optionsE. Add New StrokeF. Add New FillG. Add New EffectH. Clear AppearanceI. Duplicate Selected ItemJ. Delete Selected ItemK. Indicates an effect applied

The Appearance panel (Window > Appearance) can be used to view and adjust the appearance attributes for a selected object, group, or layer. Fills and strokes are listed in stacking order; top to bottom in the panel correlates to front to back in the artwork. Effects applied to artwork are listed from top to bottom in the order in which they are applied to the artwork. An advantage of using appearance attributes is that they can be changed or removed at any time without affecting the underlying artwork or any other attributes applied to the object in the Appearance panel.

Editing appearance attributes
You'll start by changing the basic appearance of artwork using the Appearance panel.

1. With the trumpet shape still selected (see steps in previous section), choose Select > Same > Fill Color to select the rest of the black trumpet shapes.

Notice that the content of the Appearance panel doesn't really change. The same appearance properties are listed. If you were to select multiple objects that had different fills, for instance, the Appearance panel would show "Mixed Appearance," indicating that the selected artwork has some appearance attributes that are different.

 Note
You may need to click the Fill box twice to open the Swatches panel.

2. In the Appearance panel, click the black Fill color box in the Fill attribute row until the Swatches panel appears. Click the swatch named "Trumpet" to apply it to the Fill. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.
You will find that you can change appearance attributes, like Fill color, in the Appearance panel or elsewhere in the workspace.

3. Click the words "0.5 pt" in the Stroke row. The Stroke Weight option appears. Change the Stroke weight to 0 to remove it.

4. Click the underlined word "Stroke" to reveal the Stroke panel.
Clicking underlined words in the Appearance panel, as in the Control panel, shows more formatting options—usually in a panel like the Swatches or Stroke panels. Appearance attributes, like Fill or Stroke, can have other options, like Opacity or an effect applied to only that attribute. These additional options are listed as a subset under the attribute row and can be shown or hidden by clicking the disclosure triangle () on the left end of the attribute row.
5. Press the Escape key to hide the Stroke panel.
6. Click the disclosure triangle () to the left of the word "Fill" in the Appearance panel to reveal the Opacity option (if necessary). Click the word "Opacity" to reveal the Transparency panel. Change the Opacity value to 100%. Press the Escape key to hide the Transparency panel and to return to the Appearance panel.

7. Click the visibility column () to the left of the Drop Shadow attribute name in the Appearance panel.
Appearance attributes can be deleted or temporarily hidden so that they no longer are applied.
8. With the Drop Shadow row selected (click to the right of the link "Drop Shadow" if it isn't selected), click the Delete Selected Item button () at the bottom of the panel to completely remove the shadow, rather than just turning off the visibility.


 Tip
You may want to drag the bottom of the Appearance panel group up to make it shorter (we did).

9. With the trumpet shapes still selected, choose Object > Group and leave the new group selected for the next section.

In the Appearance panel, the word "Group" appears at the top. With the group selected, you can now apply appearance attributes to the group and they will appear in the panel. The word "Contents" also appears below the word "Group." If you were to double-click the word "Contents" in the Appearance panel, you would see the appearance attributes of the individual items in the group.

 Tip
You can view all hidden attributes by choosing Show All Hidden Attributes from the Appearance panel menu.


Adding another stroke and fill
Artwork in Illustrator can have more than one stroke and fill applied to it to add interesting design elements. You'll now add another fill to an object using the Appearance panel.


 Note
The figure has the Fill row toggled open revealing the content. Yours may not look like that, and that's okay.

1. With the trumpet group still selected, click the Add New Fill button () at the bottom of the Appearance panel. The first part of the figure shows what the panel looks like after clicking the Add New Fill button.

New Stroke and Fill rows are added to the Appearance panel and applied to the group as a whole. The fill and stroke attributes tend to be applied on top of the fill and stroke attributes applied to the individual objects in the group.
2. Click the black Fill color box in the Fill attribute row until the Swatches panel appears. Click the pattern swatch named "Paper" to apply it to the Fill. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.
3. Click the disclosure triangle () to the left of the word "Fill," if necessary. Click the word Opacity (under the Fill row) to show the Transparency panel and choose Multiply from the Blending Mode menu.
In the Appearance panel, appearance attributes with a disclosure triangle have options like Opacity that affect only that appearance attribute.


 Tip
Other ways to close panels that appear when clicking an underlined word, like "Stroke," include pressing the Escape key or clicking the Stroke attribute row.

4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Now you'll add another stroke to text using the Appearance panel. This can be a great way to achieve interesting design effects with just one object.

5. In the Layers panel (Window > Layers), click the visibility column to the left of the Text layer to show its contents.
6. Select the Type tool () in the Tools panel and click twice on the black "JAZZ" text to select it.
In the Appearance panel, notice the Stroke (None) and the Fill (black). Also notice that you cannot add another stroke or fill to the text since the Add New Stroke and Add New Fill buttons are dimmed at the bottom of the panel.
7. Select the Selection tool and notice "Type" at the top of the Appearance panel.
With the type object selected (and not the text), you can now add multiple fills and strokes to text.

 Note
We dragged the bottom of the Appearance panel down to see more of the appearance attributes.

8. Click the Add New Fill button () at the bottom of the Appearance panel.
A new fill row and stroke row are added above the word "Characters" in the Appearance panel.

9. With the new Fill attribute row selected, click the Fill color box and select the blue/green gradient swatch named "Jazz." This new fill will cover the existing black text fill. Press the Escape key to hide the swatches.
10. Click the Add New Fill button () at the bottom of the Appearance panel once more to add another fill.
A duplicate of the existing Fill row appears above.
11. Click the bottom Fill attribute row to select it. Click the Fill color box and select the pattern swatch named "Paper." Press the Escape key to hide the swatches.

Notice that the paper swatch doesn't show in the artwork. That's because it is beneath the Fill attribute row with the gradient applied. Like we mentioned earlier, the ordering of the attribute rows is important, much like the ordering of layers is important. The top appearance row shows on top of the appearance attributes beneath it.

 Tip
Depending on which attribute row is selected in the Attributes panel, the options in panels, like the Control panel, Gradient panel, and others, will affect the attribute selected.


Reordering appearance attributes
The ordering of the appearance attribute rows can greatly change how your artwork looks. In the Appearance panel, fills and strokes are listed in stacking order—top to bottom in the panel correlates to front to back in the artwork. You can reorder attribute rows in a way similar to dragging layers in the Layers panel to rearrange the stacking order. Now you'll change the appearance of the artwork by reordering attributes in the Appearance panel.

1. Click the disclosure triangle () to the left of all of the appearance rows in the Appearance panel to hide their properties.

2. Drag the bottom Fill attribute row (with the Paper pattern swatch applied) up above the original Fill attribute row with the blue/green gradient.

 Tip
You can also apply blending modes and opacity changes to each Fill row to achieve different results.

Moving the new Fill attribute above the original Fill attribute changes the look of the artwork. The pattern fill is now covering the gradient fill.
3. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of the Fill attribute row with the Paper pattern fill. Click the word Opacity to show the Transparency panel and choose Multiply from the Blending Mode menu.

4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.
Now that you've begun to explore the options in the Appearance panel, you'll begin adding effects to the artwork and use the Appearance panel for those as well.

Applying an appearance attribute to a layer
You can also apply appearance attributes to layers or sublayers. For example, to make everything on a layer 50% opaque, you can target that layer and change the opacity. Every object on that layer will have the 50% opacity applied (even if you add the object to the layer later).
For more information on applying an appearance attribute to a layer, check out the section "Applying appearance attributes to layers" in Lesson 8, "Organizing Your Artwork with Layers."


Using live effects
Effects alter the appearance of an object without changing the underlying artwork. Applying an effect adds the effect to the object's appearance attribute, which you can edit, move, delete, or duplicate, at any time, in the Appearance panel.



Artwork with a Drop Shadow effect applied.


 Note
When you apply a raster effect, the original vector data is rasterized using the document's raster effects settings, which determine the resolution of the resulting image. To learn about document raster effects settings, search for "Document raster effects settings" in Illustrator Help.

There are two types of effects in Illustrator: vector effects and raster effects. In Illustrator, click the Effect menu item to see the different types of effects available.
• Vector (Illustrator) effects: The top half of the Effect menu contains vector effects. You can apply these effects only to vector objects or to the fill or stroke of a bitmap object in the Appearance panel. The following vector effects can be applied to both vector and bitmap objects: 3D effects, SVG filters, Warp effects, Transform effects, Drop Shadow, Feather, Inner Glow, and Outer Glow.
• Raster (Photoshop) effects: The bottom half of the Effect menu contains raster effects. You can apply them to either vector or bitmap objects.
In this section, you will first explore how to apply and edit effects. You will then explore a few of the more widely used effects in Illustrator to get an idea for the range of effects available.

Applying an effect
Effects are applied using the Effect menu or the Appearance panel and can be applied to objects, groups, or layers. You are first going to learn how to apply an effect using the Effect menu, and then you will apply an effect using the Appearance panel.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click the trumpet group on the artboard.
2. Choose Effect > Stylize > Drop Shadow from the Illustrator Effects section of the menu that appears.

3. In the Drop Shadow dialog box, change the following options:
• Mode: Multiply (the default setting)
• Opacity: 100%
• X Offset: .03 in
• Y Offset: .03 in
• Blur: .04 in
• Darkness: Selected, 50%
4. Select Preview to see the drop shadow applied to the artwork. Click OK.
Later in the lesson, you'll apply an effect using a different method.
5. Choose File > Save, and leave the trumpet group selected.

Editing an effect
Effects are live, so they can be edited after they are applied to an object. You can edit the effect in the Appearance panel by selecting the object with the effect applied, and then either clicking the name of the effect or double-clicking the attribute row in the Appearance panel. This displays the dialog box for that effect. Changes you make to the effect update in the artwork. In this section, you will edit the Drop Shadow effect applied to the trumpet group.


1. With the grouped trumpet shapes still selected and the Appearance panel showing, click the orange text "Drop Shadow" in the Appearance panel.
2. In the Drop Shadow dialog box, change Opacity to 75%. Select Preview to see the change, and then click OK.

3. Choose Object > Ungroup to ungroup the trumpet shapes.

 Tip
In the Appearance panel, you can drag an attribute row, such as Drop Shadow, to the Delete Selected Item button () to delete it, or select the attribute row and click the Delete Selected Item button.

Notice that the drop shadow is no longer applied to the trumpet group. When an effect is applied to a group, it affects the group as a whole. If the objects are no longer grouped together, the effect is no longer applied.
4. Choose Edit > Undo Ungroup to regroup the artwork and apply the drop shadow again.

Styling text with a Warp effect
Text can have all sorts of effects applied, including a Warp, like you saw in Lesson 7, "Adding Type to a Poster." Next, you will use a Warp effect to warp the date text. The difference between the Warp you applied in Lesson 7 and this Warp effect is that this Warp effect can be turned on and off, edited, or removed easily.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, select the text "May 10-17."
2. Choose Effect > Warp > Flag.
3. In the Warp Options dialog box, to create an arcing effect, set Bend to 20%. Select Preview to preview the changes. Try choosing other styles from the Style menu, and then return to Flag. Try adjusting the Horizontal and Vertical Distortion sliders to see the effect. Make sure that the Distortion values are returned to 0, and then click OK.

4. With the warped text object still selected, click the visibility icon () to the left of the "Warp: Flag" row in the Appearance panel to turn off visibility for the effect. Notice that the text is no longer warped on the artboard (see the figure below).

5. Select the Type tool () in the Tools panel, and select the text "10-17" on the artboard and change it to 10-18.

6. Select all of the text "May 10-18" and change the Fill color to White in the Control panel.
If the Appearance panel is still open and the cursor is in the text, notice that the effect isn't listed in the panel. That's because the effect was applied to the type area, not to the text within.
7. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Click the visibility column to the left of the "Warp: Flag" row in the Appearance panel, to turn on visibility for the effect so that the text is once again warped.
Since the text is white on a white background (for now), you won't be able to see the warp.
8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Editing shapes with a Pathfinder effect
Pathfinder effects are similar to working with Pathfinder commands in the Pathfinder panel, except that they are applied as effects and do not change the underlying artwork. To learn more about the Pathfinder commands, see the "Working with the Pathfinder panel" section in Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."


Applying the Offset Path effect
Next, you will offset the stroke for the "JAZZ" text. This process allows you to create the appearance of multiple stacked shapes.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click the "JAZZ" text object to select it.
2. Click the Stroke color in the Appearance panel, and make sure that the White swatch is selected in the Swatches panel. Press Enter or Return to close the Swatches panel, and return to the Appearance panel.

3. Make sure that the Stroke weight is 1 pt.
4. With the Stroke attribute row selected in the Appearance panel, choose Effect > Path > Offset Path.
5. In the Offset Path dialog box, change the Offset to -0.04 in, select Preview, and then click OK.

6. In the Appearance panel, click the disclosure triangle to the left of the words "Stroke: 1 pt" to toggle it open (if it's not already open). Notice that the "Offset Path" effect is a subset of Stroke. This indicates that the Offset Path effect is applied to only that Stroke.

7. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Applying a raster effect
As described earlier in the lesson, raster effects generate pixels rather than vector data. Raster effects include SVG Filters, all of the effects in the bottom portion of the Effect menu, and the Drop Shadow, Inner Glow, Outer Glow, and Feather commands in the Effect > Stylize submenu. You can apply them to either vector or bitmap objects.

Next, you will apply a raster (Photoshop) effect to the "FESTIVAL" text.
1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the "FESTIVAL" text.
2. Choose Effect > Texture > Texturizer.
When you choose most of the raster (Photoshop) effects (not all), the Filter Gallery dialog box opens. Similar to working with filters in Adobe Photoshop, where you can also access a Filter Gallery, in the Illustrator Filter Gallery, you can try out different raster effects to see how they affect your artwork.
3. With the Filter Gallery dialog box open, choose Fit In View from the view menu in the lower-left corner of the dialog box. That should fit the artwork in the preview area, so you can see how the effect alters the artwork.
The Filter Gallery dialog box, which is resizable, contains a preview area (labeled A); effect thumbnails that you can click to apply (labeled B); settings for the currently selected effect (labeled C); and the list of effects applied (labeled D). If you want to apply a different effect, expand a category in the middle panel of the dialog box, click a thumbnail, or choose an effect name from the menu in the upper-right corner of the dialog box.

4. Change the Texturizer settings in the upper-right corner of the dialog box as follows (if necessary):
• Texture: Canvas (the default setting)
• Scaling: 110
• Relief: 5
• Light: Top (the default setting)

5. Click the eye icon () to the left of the name Texturizer to see the artwork without the effect applied. Click the same icon area again to preview the effect on the artwork. Click OK to apply the raster effect.

 Note
The Filter Gallery only lets you apply one effect at a time. If you want to apply multiple Photoshop effects, you can click OK to apply the current effect, and then choose another from the Effect menu.


Working with 3D effects
Using Illustrator 3D effects, you can create three-dimensional (3D) objects from your two-dimensional (2D) artwork. You can control the appearance of 3D objects with lighting, shading, rotation, and other attributes, such as mapping artwork to each surface of the three-dimensional object (mapping is allowed with Extrude & Bevel or Revolve). There are three 3D effects that you can apply to artwork: Extrude & Bevel, Revolve, and Rotate. Below are visual examples of each type of 3D effect:



Applying a 3D Rotate effect
The Rotate effect is a simple way to rotate artwork in 3D. Next, you are going to rotate the JAZZ text.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the JAZZ text object.
2. Choose Effect > 3D > Rotate.
3. In the 3D Rotate Options dialog box, set the following options:
• X axis: 10°
• Y axis: -20°
• Z axis: 10°
• Perspective: 0° (the default setting)
• Surface: No Shading (the default setting)

 Note
3D objects may display anti-aliasing artifacts onscreen, but these artifacts generally won't print or appear in artwork optimized for the Web.

4. Select Preview to see the effect applied (if it's not selected).

Notice the warning near the bottom of the 3D Rotate Options dialog box that states, "Gradients will be rasterized." This means that the gradient used in the JAZZ text fill will be rasterized (that is, displayed and printed as a bitmap graphic). The resolution (PPI) of the rasterized portion of the artwork is based on the settings in the Document Raster Effects Settings dialog box (Effect > Document Raster Effects Settings).

 Note
Depending on the speed of the computer you are working on and the amount of RAM available, it may take some time to process changes made. If that's the case, you can deselect Preview, change the options, and then select Preview at the end.

5. Click and drag the left edge of the face of the track cube (it's blue in color) to the right (see the figure). Notice the text rotate as you drag.

For unconstrained rotation, you can drag a track cube face. The front of the object is represented by the track cube's blue face, the object's top and bottom faces are light gray, the sides are medium gray, and the back face is dark gray.
6. Choose "Off-Axis Front" from the Position menu and click OK.

7. With the Selection tool, drag the text up to position it, like you see in the figure.

 Note
Notice that every time you release the mouse button, Illustrator needs to process the change and redraw the 3D text. You will not see the 3D text as you drag; instead, you will see the text without the effect.

8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Using graphic styles
A graphic style is a saved set of appearance attributes that you can reuse. By applying graphic styles, you can quickly and globally change the appearance of objects and text.

The Graphic Styles panel (Window > Graphic Styles) lets you create, name, save, apply, and remove effects and attributes for objects, layers, and groups. You can also break the link between an object and an applied graphic style to edit that object's attributes without affecting other objects that use the same graphic style.
For example, if you have a map that uses a shape to represent a city, you can create a graphic style that paints the shape green and adds a drop shadow. You can then use that graphic style to paint all the city shapes on the map. If you decide to use a different color, you can change the fill color of the graphic style to blue. All the objects that use that graphic style are then updated to blue.

Applying an existing graphic style
You can apply graphic styles to your artwork from graphic style libraries that come with Illustrator. Now you'll add a graphic style to some of the text in the design.

1. Click the Graphic Styles panel tab. Click the Graphic Styles Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the panel, and choose Vonster Pattern Styles.

 Tip
Use the arrows at the bottom of the Vonster Pattern Styles library panel to load the previous or next Graphic Styles library in the panel.

2. With the Selection tool (), select the number 3 shape in the upper-left corner of the artboard. Make sure that the "JAZZ" text isn't selected.
3. Click the "Alyssa 1" graphic style in the Vonster Pattern Styles panel. Close the Vonster Pattern Styles panel.

Clicking that style applies the appearance attributes to the selected "3" artwork and adds the graphic style to the Graphic Styles panel for the active document.
With the number 3 still selected, look in the Appearance panel to see the stroke and multiple fills applied to the selected artwork. Also notice "Path: Alyssa 1" at the top of the panel. This indicates that the graphic style named "Alyssa 1" is applied.

4. Click the Graphics Style panel tab to show the panel again. Click the JAZZ text, and then right-click and hold down the mouse button on the Alyssa 1 graphic style thumbnail in the Graphic Styles panel to preview the graphic style on the artwork. When you're finished previewing, release the mouse button.

Previewing a graphic style is a great way to see how it will affect the selected object, without actually applying it.
5. Choose File > Save.

 Note
You may see a warning icon appear on the left end of the Control panel. That's okay. This is a helpful indicator that the topmost fill/stroke is not active in the Appearance panel.


Creating and applying a graphic style
Now you'll create a new graphic style and apply that graphic style to artwork.

1. Click the number 3 again, and click the Appearance panel tab to show the panel. Click the Add New Fill button () at the bottom of the Appearance panel.


 Note
You can drag the bottom of the Appearance panel down to see more of the attributes.

There should now be a total of three fills applied to the number 3. Also notice that the "Alyssa 1" is gone from the "Path" toward the top of the panel. This means that the graphic style is no longer applied to the artwork. The number 3 will not update if the Alyssa 1 graphic style is edited.
2. Make the following changes to the Fill attribute rows, using the figure as a guide:
• Top Fill attribute row: Click the Fill color and select the pattern swatch named "Lines." Press the Escape key to hide the swatches.
• Middle Fill attribute row: Click the Fill color and select the pattern swatch named "Paper." Click the disclosure triangle to the left of the same Fill row, and click the Opacity link below the Paper fill row to show the Transparency panel. Choose Luminosity from the Blending Mode menu. Press the Escape key to hide the Transparency panel.
• Bottom Fill attribute row: Click the Fill color and select the orange swatch named "Festival." Press the Escape key to hide the swatches.

The number 3 should now have a series of textures and an orange color applied to the fill. Remember that the order of the attribute rows in the Appearance panel is very important. This is especially important when you change the Opacity blending modes and want to blend the appearance attributes to achieve certain visual effects. Blending modes affect attribute rows below the attribute row that the blend mode is applied to in the Appearance panel.
3. Leave the number 3 shape selected.
4. Click the Graphic Styles panel tab to show the Graphic Styles panel. Click the New Graphic Style button () at the bottom of the panel.
The appearance attributes from the number 3 are saved as a graphic style.


 Tip
To create a graphic style, you can also click to select the object that you are using to make the graphic style. In the Appearance panel, drag the appearance thumbnail at the top of the listing into the Graphic Styles panel. The panels can't be in the same panel group.

5. In the Graphic Styles panel, double-click the new graphic style thumbnail. In the Graphic Style Options dialog box, name the new style Number. Click OK.

6. Click the Appearance panel tab and, at the top of the Appearance panel, you will see "Path: Number."
This indicates that a graphic style named Number is applied to the selected artwork (a path). You could now apply the Number graphic style to other artwork.

7. Open the Layers panel (Window > Layers) and click the visibility column for the Background layer to show the black shape behind the other content on the artboard. Click the lock icon in the edit column to unlock the Background layer as well.

8. With the Selection tool, click the black rectangle in the background. In the Graphic Styles panel, click the graphic style named "Number" to apply the styling.

9. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Applying a graphic style to text
When you apply a graphic style to type, the fill color of the text overrides the fill color of the graphic style by default. If you deselect Override Character Color from the Graphic Styles panel menu (), the fill color (if there is one) in the graphic style will override the color of the text. If you choose Use Text For Preview from the Graphic Styles panel menu (), you can then right-click and hold down the mouse button on a graphic style to preview the graphic style on the text.


Updating a graphic style
Once you create a graphic style, you can still edit the object that the style is applied to. You can also update a graphic style, and all artwork with that style applied will update its appearance as well.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click the number 3 to select it.
Look in the Graphic Styles panel; you will see that the "Number" graphic style thumbnail is highlighted (has a border around it), indicating that it is applied.
2. Click the Appearance panel tab. Notice the text "Path: Number" at the top of the panel, indicating that the Number graphic style is applied. This is another way to tell if a graphic style is applied to selected artwork.

3. Click the Fill color for the bottom appearance row (the one with the orange color). Select the purple swatch named "Hills." Press the Escape key to hide the swatches.
Notice that the "Path: Number" text at the top of the Appearance panel is now just "Path," telling you that the graphic style is no longer applied to the selected artwork.
4. Click the Graphic Styles panel tab to see that the Number graphic style no longer has a highlight (border) around it, which means that the graphic style is no longer applied.
5. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and drag the selected number 3 shape on top of the Number graphic style thumbnail in the Graphic Styles panel. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key when the thumbnail is highlighted. The number 3 and the background rectangle now look the same, since the Number graphic style has been applied to both objects.

6. Choose Select > Deselect.
7. Click the Appearance panel tab. You will see "No Selection: Number" at the top of the panel (you may need to scroll up).
When you apply appearance settings, graphic styles, and more to artwork, the next shape you draw will have the appearance settings listed in the Appearance panel.

8. Click to select the rectangle in the background that has the Number graphic style applied.
Next, you will remove all formatting from the rectangle and then add a black fill again.

 Tip
If you were to click the Clear Appearance button with nothing selected, you would set the default appearance for new artwork to no fill and no stroke.

9. Click the Clear Appearance button () at the bottom of the Appearance panel.

With artwork selected, the Clear Appearance button removes all appearance attributes applied to selected artwork, including any stroke or fill.

 Note
The figure shows the result after clicking the Clear Appearance button.

10. Click the Fill color for the Fill appearance row and select the Black swatch.

11. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Applying a graphic style to a layer
When a graphic style is applied to a layer, everything added to that layer has that same style applied to it. Now you'll apply a Drop Shadow graphic style that comes with Illustrator to the Text layer; this will apply the style to all of the contents of that layer at once.


 Note
If you apply a graphic style to artwork and then apply a graphic style to the layer (or sublayer) that it's on, the graphic style formatting is added to the appearance of the artwork—it's cumulative. This can change the artwork in ways you didn't expect, since applying a graphic style to the layer will be added to the formatting of the artwork.

1. In Layers panel, click the target icon () for the Text layer.
This selects the layer content and targets the layer for any appearance attributes.


 Tip
In the Layers panel, you can drag a target icon to the Trash button () at the bottom of the Layers panel to remove the appearance attributes.

2. Click the Graphic Styles panel icon (), and then click the Drop Shadow graphic style thumbnail to apply the style to the layer and all its contents.

The target icon in the Layers panel for the Text layer is now shaded.
3. Click the Appearance panel tab and you should see, with all of the artwork on the Text layer still selected, the words "Layer: Drop Shadow."

This is telling you that the layer target icon is selected in the Layers panel and that the Drop Shadow graphic style is applied to that layer.

 Tip
In the Graphic Styles panel, graphic style thumbnails that show a small box with a red slash () indicate that the graphic style does not contain a stroke or fill. It may just be a drop shadow or outer glow, for instance.

4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Applying multiple graphic styles
You can apply a graphic style to an object that already has a graphic style applied. This can be useful if you want to add properties to an object from another graphic style. After you apply a graphic style to selected artwork, you can then Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) another graphic style thumbnail to add the graphic style formatting to the existing formatting, rather than replacing it.


Scaling strokes and effects
In Illustrator, when scaling (resizing) content, any strokes and effects that are applied do not change. For instance, suppose you scale a circle with a 2-pt. stroke from small to the size of the artboard. The shape may change size, but the stroke will remain 2 pt. by default. That can change the appearance of scaled artwork in a way that you didn't intend, so you'll need to watch out for that when transforming artwork.

1. Click the trumpet group to select it.
Next, you will make the trumpet group larger, but you will also scale the drop shadow effect applied to it proportionally.

 Note
If you choose Window > Transform to open the Transform panel, you may need to choose Show Options from the panel menu.

2. Click X, Y, W, or H link in the Control panel to reveal the Transform panel (Window > Transform). Select Scale Strokes & Effects at the bottom of the Transform panel. Click the Constrain Width And Height Proportions button (). Change the Width (W) to 12.7 in. Press the Tab key to tab to the next field. The Height should change proportionally with the Width.

If you were to open the Drop Shadow options in the Appearance panel for the trumpet group, you would see that the values have adjusted according to the sizing. If "Scale Strokes & Effects" weren't selected, the drop shadow values would be the same before and after the transformation.
3. Choose Select > Deselect.
4. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.


Review questions
1. How do you add a second stroke to artwork?

2. What's the difference between applying a graphic style to a layer versus applying it to selected artwork?
3. Name two ways to apply an effect to an object.
4. When you apply a Photoshop (raster) effect to vector artwork, what happens to the artwork?
5. Where can you access the options for effects applied to an object?

Review answers
1. To add a second stroke to an object, click the Add New Stroke button () in the Appearance panel or choose Add New Stroke from the Appearance panel menu. A stroke is added to the top of the appearance list. It has the same color and stroke weight as the original.

2. When a style is applied to a single object, other objects on that layer are not affected. For example, if a triangle object has a Roughen effect applied to its path and you move it to another layer, it retains the Roughen effect.
After a graphic style is applied to a layer, everything you add to the layer has that style applied to it. For example, if you create a circle on Layer 1 and then move that circle to Layer 2, which has a Drop Shadow effect applied, the circle adopts that effect.
3. You can apply an effect to an object by selecting the object and then choosing the effect from the Effect menu. You can also apply an effect by selecting the object, clicking the Add New Effect button () at the bottom of the Appearance panel, and then choosing the effect from the menu that appears.
4. Applying a Photoshop effect to artwork generates pixels rather than vector data. Photoshop effects include SVG Filters, all of the effects in the bottom portion of the Effect menu, and the Drop Shadow, Inner Glow, Outer Glow, and Feather commands in the Effect > Stylize submenu. You can apply them to either vector or bitmap objects.
5. You can edit effects applied to selected artwork by clicking the effect link in the Appearance panel to access the effect options.







12. Creating a Product Mockup in Perspective

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Understand perspective drawing.
• Use grid presets.
• Adjust the perspective grid.
• Draw and transform content in perspective.
• Edit grid planes and content.
• Bring content into perspective.
• Create text and bring it into perspective.
• Bring symbols into perspective.
• Edit symbols in perspective.

This lesson takes approximately 60 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



In Adobe Illustrator CC, you can easily draw or render artwork in perspective using the perspective grid. The perspective grid allows you to approximately represent a scene, on a flat surface, as the human eye naturally perceives it.


Getting started
In this lesson, you'll explore working with the perspective grid by adding content to and editing content on the grid. Before you begin, you'll restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator. Then, you'll open the finished art file for this lesson to see what you'll create.


 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of this book.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.
2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Choose File > Open, and open the L12_end.ai file in the Lessons > Lesson12 folder on your hard disk.
You are going to create some product boxes for a makeup ad.

4. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window and leave the file open for reference, or choose File > Close.
5. Choose File > Open. Navigate to the Lessons > Lesson12 folder on your hard disk. Open the L12_start.ai file.
6. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

7. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the Lesson12 folder and name the file MakeupAd.ai. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and then click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.

 Note
In Mac OS, when opening lesson files, you may need to click the round, green button in the upper-left corner of the Document window to maximize the window's size.

8. Choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher in the Application bar.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.


Understanding the perspective grid
In Illustrator, using the Perspective Grid tool () and the Perspective Selection tool (), you can easily draw or render artwork in perspective. You can define the perspective grid in one-point, two-point, or three-point perspective, define a scale, move the grid planes, and draw objects directly in perspective. You can even attach flat art onto the grid planes by dragging with the Perspective Selection tool.

1. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the Layers panel. In the Layers panel, select the Perspective layer. Click the Layers panel icon to collapse the panel again.

2. Select the Perspective Grid tool () in the Tools panel.
The default two-point perspective grid (which is non-printing) appears on the artboard and can be used to draw and snap content in perspective. The two-point grid (for short) is composed of several planes or surfaces, by default—left (blue), right (orange), and a ground plane (green).
The figure below shows the default perspective grid by itself, with all of its options showing. It may be helpful to refer back to this figure as you progress through the lesson.


A. Plane Switching WidgetB. Vertical grid extentC. Perspective Grid ruler (not showing, by default)D. Left vanishing pointE. Horizon levelF. Horizon heightG. Left ground level pointH. Extent of gridI. Grid cell sizeJ. Right grid plane controlK. Horizontal grid plane controlL. Left grid plane controlM. OriginN. Extent of gridO. Right ground level pointP. Right vanishing point


Working with the perspective grid
In order to begin working with content in perspective, it is helpful to see and set up the perspective grid the way you want.


Using a preset grid
To begin the lesson, you'll work with the perspective grid, starting with an Illustrator preset. The perspective grid, by default, is set up as a two-point perspective. You can easily change the grid to a one-point, two-point, or three-point grid using presets, which is what you'll do next.


 Note
A one-point perspective can be very useful for roads, railway tracks, or buildings viewed so that the front is directly facing the viewer. Two-point perspective is useful for drawing a cube, such as a building, or for two roads going off into the distance, and it typically has two vanishing points. Three-point perspective is usually used for buildings seen from above or below.

1. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Three Point Perspective > [3P-Normal View]. Notice that the grid changes to a three-point perspective.

In addition to showing vanishing points for each wall, there is now a point showing those walls receding into the ground or high in space.
2. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Two Point Perspective > [2P-Normal View]. Notice that the grid changes back to the default two-point perspective.

Adjusting the perspective grid
To create artwork in the perspective you want, you can adjust the grid using the Perspective Grid tool () or using the View > Perspective Grid > Define Grid command. You can make changes to the grid if you have content on it, although it will be easier to establish what your grid looks like before you add content. In this section, you'll make a few adjustments to the grid. First, you'll move the grid where you're going to draw some boxes. You can also draw content in the default grid position and move that content later.

1. Make sure that the Smart Guides are on (View > Smart Guides).

2. With the Perspective Grid tool () selected, position the pointer over the left ground-level point (circled in the figure). When the pointer changes (), drag it to the left and up to move the whole perspective grid. Match the position in the figure as closely as you can, but it does not have to match exactly.
The left and right ground-level points allow you to drag the perspective grid to different parts of the artboard or to a different artboard altogether.
Next, you'll change the height of the grid.
3. With the Perspective Grid tool, position the pointer over the Vertical Grid Extent point (indicated by the red X in the figure). When the pointer changes (), drag it down to roughly match the figure to shorten the vertical extent.


 Tip
The location of the ground level in relation to the horizon line will determine how far above or below eye level the object will be viewed.

Dragging the vertical extent down is a way to minimize the grid if you are drawing objects that are less precise, as you will see later in the lesson.
4. Position the pointer over the right end of the horizon line, and the pointer shows a vertical arrow (). Click and drag up a bit until you see approximately 270 pt in the gray measurement label next to the pointer. The closer you are zoomed in to the grid, the finer the increments that you can adjust it with.

Next, you will adjust the planes so that you can draw a product box that shows one side more than the other. This requires that you move a vanishing point.
5. Press Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows), twice, to zoom out.
6. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Lock Station Point.
This locks the left and right vanishing points so that they move together.
7. With the Perspective Grid tool, position the pointer over the right vanishing point (circled in the figure). When the pointer includes a horizontal arrow (), drag to the right until the measurement label shows an X value of approximately 15 in.

 Tip
If you had artwork on the grid, it would move with the grid.

This changes both planes on the grid, and the product box you create will have a more visible right face.

Setting the grid up for your drawing is an important step in creating the artwork with the perspective you desire. Next, you will access some of the perspective grid options you have already adjusted, and more, using the Define Perspective Grid dialog box.
8. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
9. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Define Grid.

 Tip
After setting the Define Perspective Grid settings, you can save them as a preset to access later. In the Define Perspective Grid dialog box, change the settings, and then click the Save Preset button ().

10. In the Define Perspective Grid dialog box, change the following options:
• Units: Inches
• Gridline Every: 0.3 in

 Note
If the rest of the values in the Define Perspective Grid dialog box don't match the figure, that's okay. Don't attempt to match the values since it can change your grid in unexpected ways.

Changing the Gridline Every option adjusts the grid cell size and can help you be more precise when drawing and editing on the grid, since content snaps to the lines of the grid by default. Notice that you can also change the Scale of the grid, which you might want to do if real-world measurements are involved. You can also edit settings, like Horizon Height and Viewing Angle, on the artboard, using the Perspective Grid tool. Leave the Grid Color & Opacity settings at their defaults.

When you have finished making changes, click OK. The grid will change in appearance slightly. The grid should now look pretty close to this (but doesn't have to match exactly):


 Note
To learn more about the options in the Define Perspective Grid dialog box, search for "Perspective drawing" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).


 Note
When you select a tool other than the Perspective Grid tool (), you cannot edit the perspective grid. Also, if the perspective grid is locked you cannot edit most of the grid settings with the Perspective Grid tool. You can edit a locked grid by choosing View > Perspective Grid > Define Grid.

11. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Lock Grid.
This command restricts the grid movement and other grid-editing features of the Perspective Grid tool. You can only change the visibility and the grid plane position, which you will work with later in this lesson.
12. Choose File > Save.

Drawing objects in perspective
To draw objects in perspective, you can use the line group tools or the rectangle group tools (except for the Flare tool) while the grid is visible. Before you begin drawing using any of these tools, you need to select a grid plane to attach the content to, using the Plane Switching Widget or keyboard shortcuts.

When the perspective grid is showing, a Plane Switching Widget appears in the upper-left corner of the Document window by default. The grid plane that is selected in the Plane Switching Widget is the active grid plane of the perspective grid to which you'll add content. In the widget, you can select the planes, as well as see their keyboard shortcut when you hover over each part of the widget.


A. Left Grid(1)B. Horizontal Grid(2)C. Right Grid(3)D. No Active Grid(4)

1. Select the Rectangle tool () in the Tools panel.
2. Select Left Grid(1), in the Plane Switching Widget (if it's not already selected).


 Tip
When drawing in perspective, you will find that you can still use the usual keyboard shortcuts for drawing objects, such as Shift-drag to constrain.


 Tip
You can turn off grid snapping by choosing View > Perspective Grid > Snap To Grid. Snapping is enabled by default.

3. Position the pointer at the origin of the perspective grid (where the two planes meet at the bottom). Notice that the cursor has an arrow pointing to the left (), indicating that you are about to draw on the left grid plane. Drag up and to the left, until the gray measurement label shows an approximate width of 2.4 in and a height of approximately 3 in. As you drag, the pointer should be snapping to the gridlines.
Zooming in brings into view more gridlines that are closer to the vanishing point. That's why, depending on the zoom level, your grid may not match the figures exactly, and that's okay.

4. With the rectangle selected, change the Fill color in the Control panel to the orange/red swatch named "Box Left." Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.

5. Change the Stroke color to None (), in the Control panel.
There are many ways to add content to the perspective grid. Next, you'll create another rectangle a different way.
6. Press Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows), twice, to zoom in to the grid.

7. With the Rectangle tool still selected, click Right Grid(3) in the Plane Switching Widget to draw in perspective on the right grid plane.
8. Position the pointer over the upper-right corner of the rectangle you drew. When the word "anchor" appears, click. In the Rectangle dialog box, the width and height of the last rectangle you drew are showing. Click OK.
Notice that the pointer now has an arrow pointing to the right (), indicating that content you create will appear on the right grid plane.

9. Click the Graphic Styles panel () to show the panel. With the new rectangle still selected, click the graphic style named "Box Right" to apply it.
A graphic style is something you can use to save formatting from content you create and then apply it elsewhere. It's a great way to apply a gradient to another object so that it looks the same as the first one.


 Note
To learn more about working with graphic styles, see Lesson 11, "Exploring Creative Uses of Effects and Graphic Styles."

10. With the Rectangle tool still selected, click Horizontal Grid(2) in the Plane Switching Widget to draw in perspective on the ground (horizontal) plane.

11. Position the pointer over the upper-left corner point of the first rectangle you drew (on the left plane). When the word "anchor" appears, along with a large, hollow anchor point, click and drag to the upper-right corner point of the second rectangle you created. When a large, hollow anchor point appears on the second anchor point, release the mouse button.

12. With the rectangle selected, change the Fill color in the Control panel to the orange/red swatch named "Box Top."

 Tip
You can also show and hide the perspective grid by pressing Shift+Command+I (Mac OS) or Shift+Ctrl+I (Windows) to toggle back and forth.

13. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Hide Grid to hide the perspective grid and to see your artwork.

Selecting and transforming objects in perspective
You can select objects in perspective using selection tools, like the Selection tool () and using the Perspective Selection tool (). The Perspective Selection tool uses the active plane settings to select the objects. If you use the Selection tool to drag an object that was drawn in perspective, it maintains its original perspective, but it doesn't change to match the perspective grid.

Next, you will move and resize several of the rectangles you drew.
1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Show Grid.
3. Position the pointer over the Perspective Grid tool (), click and hold down the mouse button, and then select the Perspective Selection tool (). Click the rectangle with the gradient fill on the right grid plane to select it. Notice that the right grid plane, Right Grid(3), is now selected in the Plane Switching Widget.

 Tip
Zooming in to the grid may make it easier when resizing content.

4. With the Perspective Selection tool selected, drag the upper-right point of the rectangle up and to the left. When the measurement label shows a width of about 2.1 in and a height of 3.3 in, release the mouse button. Make sure that the rectangle is snapping to the gridlines.

Notice that the rectangle that you resized is behind the rectangle that is the top of the box. Content on the perspective grid has the same stacking order as content you draw off of the perspective grid.
5. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front.

 Note
Depending on the resolution of your screen, you may see the Transform options in the Control panel.

6. With the Perspective Selection tool, click to select the first rectangle you created (on the left plane). Click the word "Transform" in the Control panel, and then click the bottom, middle point of the reference point locator () in the Control panel. With the Constrain Width And Height Proportions option deselected (), change the Height to 3.3 in (or the same height as the shape on the right grid plane if your height is different).

7. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click several times on the top of the box to zoom in.

 Note
Select the top of the box (the rectangle) on its left side, since the right side of the box is arranged on top of it.

8. Select the Perspective Selection tool. Click to select the orange/red rectangle that is the top of the box. Drag the rectangle up from its center slightly above the other two rectangles.

Dragging artwork on the horizontal grid up or down with the Perspective Selection tool makes it smaller and larger. Dragging it up moves the artwork "farther away" in perspective, and dragging it down moves it "closer" in perspective.

 Tip
You can also move objects from one plane to another using a keyboard command. With the objects selected, begin dragging them with the Perspective Selection tool, without releasing the mouse button yet. Press the number 1, 2, or 3 key (depending on which grid you intend to attach the objects to) to switch to the grid plane of your choice. These keyboard commands only work from the main keyboard and not from the extended numeric keypad.

9. Press Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows), twice, to zoom in to the grid.
10. Drag the leftmost point of the top rectangle so that it snaps to the upper-left corner of the rectangle on the left plane. Drag the rightmost point of the top rectangle so that it snaps to the upper-right corner of the rectangle on the right plane.

11. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Duplicating content in perspective
You can easily duplicate content on the grid using copy and paste or other methods. Next, you will duplicate an object in perspective, as well as move an object perpendicular to an existing object.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Choose View > Perspective Grid > Unlock Grid, so you can edit the grid again.
3. Position the pointer over the Perspective Selection tool (), click and hold down the mouse button, and then select the Perspective Grid tool (). Position the pointer over the right grid extent widget, indicated by the red X in the figure below. When the pointer changes (), drag to the left until it reaches the right edge of the rectangle.

Changing the extent of the grid plane allows you to see more or less of the gridlines.
Next, you will begin to create another product box to the left of the box you've already created. To do this, you will copy content.

 Tip
You can also use the Transform Again command (Object > Transform > Transform Again) or the keyboard shortcut Command+D (Mac OS) or Ctrl+D (Windows).

4. Select the Perspective Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Click to select the gradient-filled rectangle on the right grid plane. Begin dragging the rectangle to the left. As you drag, press Option+Shift (Mac OS) or Alt+Shift (Windows). Stop dragging when the measurement labels shows a dX value of -1.4 in. Release the mouse button, and then release the keys.

The Shift key constrains the movement to 45 degrees on the grid, and the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key copies the object.
5. Drag the upper-right point of the new rectangle up and to the left to make the rectangle narrower and taller. Stop dragging when the measurement label shows an approximate width of 0.62 in and a height of 5.8 in.


 Tip
For more precision, you can also zoom in on the artwork or change the size of the selected rectangle by changing the W and H values in the Control panel or in the Transform panel (Window > Transform).


Moving objects in a perpendicular direction
With the new rectangle in place, you are going to move the rectangle in a direction perpendicular to the current location. This technique is useful when creating parallel objects, such as the legs of a chair.


 Note
The keyboard shortcut 5, which is for perpendicular movement (and the keyboard shortcuts 1, 2, 3, and 4 for plane switching) while drawing or moving objects, works only from the main keyboard and not from the extended numeric keypad.

1. With the rectangle still selected, hold down the number 5 key and drag the rectangle to the right a bit. When the measurement label shows a dX value of approximately 0.25 in, release the mouse, and then release the 5 key.
This action moves the object parallel to its current location. You could also press the Option key (Mac OS) or Alt key (Windows), while dragging, to copy the object that you are dragging.

2. Press the Escape key to hide the perspective grid.

 Note
If the new rectangle is now behind the other shapes, choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front.

3. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Moving planes and objects together
As you saw in the beginning of this lesson, it's usually best to adjust the grid before there is artwork on it. But Illustrator allows you to move objects perpendicularly, similar to what you just did, by moving the grid planes instead. This can be better for more precise perpendicular movement.

Next, you will move a grid plane and artwork together.
1. Press Command+Shift+I (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows) to show the perspective grid again.
2. Select the Zoom tool (), and click the lower-left corner of the right face of the larger box twice, slowly, to zoom in to the grid.
3. Select the Perspective Selection tool (). Position the pointer over the right grid plane control (circled in the figure). When the pointer changes (), drag to the right until D: 0.5 in appears in the measurement label, and then release the mouse button.

Notice how the plane moved but the artwork stayed in place. Next, you will put the right grid plane back where it was.

 Tip
If you move a plane using the grid plane control, you can also choose Edit > Undo Perspective Grid Edit to put the plane back to its original location.

4. Double-click the same right grid plane control you just dragged (circled in the figure). In the Right Vanishing Plane dialog box, change the Location to 0 in, make sure that Do Not Move is selected, and click OK.

In the Right Vanishing Plane dialog box, the Do Not Move option allows you to move the grid plane and not the objects on it. The Copy All Objects option allows you to move the grid plane and to bring a copy of the objects on the grid plane with it. The Location option in the Right Vanishing Plane dialog box starts at the station point, which is 0. The station point is indicated by the very small green diamond on the perspective grid, above the horizontal grid control.
5. With the Perspective Selection tool still selected, double-click the left grid plane control (an arrow is pointing to it in the figure). In the Left Vanishing Plane dialog box, change the Location to -1.4 in, select Copy All Objects, and click OK.

This moves the left plane to the left (positive values move the plane to the right) and copies the rectangle, moving the copy as well. There are also a lot of keyboard commands associated with moving grid planes. You can hold down the Option (Mac OS) or Alt key (Windows) and drag a grid plane control to move the grid plane and copy the content. Dragging a grid plane control while pressing the Shift key moves the objects with the grid plane without copying them.

 Tip
If you select an object or objects on the grid plane first and then drag the grid plane control while holding down the Shift key, only the selected objects move with the grid plane.

Next, you'll resize the new rectangle so that it can become the left side of the tall box. For the following step, reference the figure as you progress.
6. Drag the lower-right point of the new rectangle, snapping it to the lower-left corner of the tall rectangle.
7. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
8. Drag the upper-right corner point of the new rectangle up, snapping it to the upper-left corner of the tall rectangle.
9. Drag the left, middle point of the rectangle to the right until a width of approximately 0.65 in shows in the measurement label.

10. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Bringing content into perspective
If you have already created content that is not in perspective, Illustrator provides an option to bring objects into perspective on an active plane in the perspective grid. You will now add a flower logo to both boxes.

1. With the Perspective Selection tool () selected, select Right Grid(3) in the Plane Switching Widget to make sure that the flower will be added to the right grid plane.


 Tip
You can also select the active plane by pressing keyboard shortcuts: 1=Left Grid, 2=Horizontal Grid, 3=Right Grid, and 4=No Active Grid.


 Note
Instead of dragging an object onto the plane using the Perspective Selection tool, you can also select the object with the Perspective Selection tool, choose the plane using the Plane Switching Widget, and then choose Object > Perspective > Attach To Active Plane. This adds the content to the active plane, but it doesn't change its appearance.

2. With the Perspective Selection tool, drag one of the red flowers off of the lower-left corner of the artboard onto the right side of the larger box.

The artwork is added to the grid that is selected in the Plane Switching Widget and is behind the rectangles in the stacking order.
3. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front.
4. Choose View > Zoom In, a few times, to zoom in to the boxes.
Next, you will scale the flower artwork, making it smaller.
5. With the Perspective Selection tool, press Shift+Option (Mac OS) or Shift+Alt (Windows) and drag the upper-right corner of the flower shape toward the center until an approximate width of 1.5 in shows in the measurement label. You won't have to drag very far.

6. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Drawing with no active grid
There will be times when you need to draw or add content that is not meant to be in perspective. In a case like that, you can select No Active Grid in the Plane Switching Widget to draw without regard to the grid. You will now add a rectangle to the background of the ad.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the Layers panel. In the Layers panel, select the Background layer. Click the lock icon () to the left of the Background name in the panel to unlock the content of the Background layer. Leave the panel showing.

3. Select the Rectangle tool () in the Tools panel. Click No Active Grid(4) in the Plane Switching Widget.
4. Starting from the upper-left corner of the artboard, drag down to the lower-right corner of the artboard to create a rectangle the size of the artboard, as shown in the figure below.

 Note
You can close the Transform panel group that opens by default after drawing a rectangle.

5. Click the Graphic Styles panel icon () to show the panel. With the new rectangle still selected, position the pointer over the graphic style thumbnail with the yellow tool tip that shows "Background" and click to apply the style.
6. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back.

7. In the Layers panel, click the edit column to the left of the Background name in the panel to lock the content of the Background layer.
8. Select the Perspective layer so that any content you add will be added to the Perspective layer. Click the Layers panel tab to hide the panel.

9. Choose Select > Deselect (if necessary).

Adding and editing text in perspective
You cannot add text directly to a perspective plane when the grid is visible. However, you can bring text into perspective after creating it off of the perspective grid. Next, you will add some text, and then edit it in perspective.

1. Select the Type tool () in the Tools panel. Click in a blank area on the artboard and type La Nouvelle, press Enter or Return, and then type Femme.


 Note
If you don't see the Font Formatting options in the Control panel, click the word "Character" in the Control panel to reveal the Character panel.

2. Select the text with the Type tool, change the Font to Trajan Pro 3 (or another font if you don't have that one), ensure that the Font Style is Regular, and change the Font Size to 20 pt in the Control panel.

 Note
If you don't see the Align options, click the word "Paragraph" in the Control panel to reveal the Paragraph panel.

3. Click the Align Center button () in the Control panel to align the text to center.
4. Select the Perspective Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Press the number 3 key on the keyboard to select the Right Grid(3) in the Plane Switching Widget. Drag the text below the red flower on the right side of the larger box.


