
 Tip
With a text object selected, you can also choose Type > Convert To Point Type or Convert To Area Type, depending on what the selected text area is.

6. Drag the lower-right bounding point down and to the left until the text "6:30 pm" wraps to the second line.
7. Drag the text area down on top of the brown end of the yellow lion's tail.


Importing a plain text file
You can import text into artwork from a file that was created in another application. Illustrator supports the following formats for importing text:

• Microsoft Word (doc)
• Microsoft Word DOCX (docx)
• Microsoft RTF (rtf)
• Plain text (txt) (ASCII) with ANSI, Unicode, Shift JIS, GB2312, Chinese Big 5, Cyrillic, GB18030, Greek, Turkish, Baltic, and Central European encoding.
One of the advantages of importing text from a file, rather than copying and pasting it, is that imported text retains its character and paragraph formatting (by default). For example, text from an RTF file retains its font and style specifications in Illustrator, unless you choose to remove formatting when you import the text.
1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, and then choose Select > Deselect.
2. In the Layers panel (Window > Layers), click the visibility column (the eye icon []) of the Tails layer to temporarily hide some of the artwork.
3. Choose File > Place. In the Lessons > Lesson07 folder, select the L7_text.txt file, select Show Import Options, and click Place.

 Note
The figures are from the Windows OS, so the Platform option that you see may be different on Mac OS, and that's okay.

4. In the Text Import Options dialog box, you can set some options prior to importing text. Leave the default settings, and then click OK.

5. Position the loaded text pointer over the upper-left corner of the aqua guide box in the center of the artboard. When the word "anchor" appears, click and drag down and to the right. As you drag, notice that the width and height are constrained (always the same proportion). Drag until the pointer reaches the bottom of the aqua guide box, and then release the mouse button.
6. With the Selection tool (), drag the corner bounding point of the text area up and to the right so that it snaps to the right edge of the aqua guide box and drag up until an overset text icon () appears in the out port. Leave the text area selected.


Placing Microsoft Word documents
When you place (File > Place) RTF (Rich Text Format) or Word documents (DOC or DOCX) in Illustrator, the Microsoft Word Options dialog box appears.
In this dialog box, you can select to keep the generated Table of Contents, footnotes and endnotes, and index text, and even choose to remove the formatting of the text before you place it (the styles and formatting are brought in from Word by default).


Working with overflow text and text reflow
Each area type object contains an in port and an out port. The ports enable you to link to other type objects and flow text between type objects. An empty out port indicates that all the text is visible and that the object isn't linked. An arrow in a port indicates that the type object is linked to another type object. A red plus sign () in an out port indicates that the object contains additional text, which is called overflow text.


There are three main methods for remedying overflow text:
• Thread the text to another type object.
• Resize the type object.
• Adjust the text.

Threading text
To thread, or continue, text from one object to the next, you have to link the objects. Linked type objects can be of any shape; however, the text must be entered in an object or along a path, not as point type (by simply clicking to create text).

Next, you will thread text from one type object to another by linking the type objects together.
1. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn them off so that you can more easily move objects without snapping.

 Note
It may be difficult to click the out port because of the guides. You can always zoom in, remembering to zoom out again for the next steps.

2. With the Selection tool (), click the out port (larger box) in the lower-right corner of the type object that has the red plus sign in it (). The pointer changes to a loaded text icon () when you move it away.


 Note
If you double-click an out port, a new type object appears. If this happens, you can either drag the new object where you would like it to be positioned or choose Edit > Undo Link Threaded Text, and the loaded text icon reappears.

Next, you will flow the overflow text into an existing type object on the next artboard.
3. Click the Next Artboard button () in the lower-left corner of the Document window to navigate to the postcard artboard.
4. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard to see the type object that's already there.
5. Position the pointer over the edge of the type object. When the pointer changes to (), click to thread the text areas and the thread (line) will appear to connect this text area.


 Note
With the loaded text icon, you can also click the artboard instead of dragging to create a new type object.

With the second type object still selected, notice the line between the two objects (the figure at right probably shows more than you can see). This line is the thread that tells you that the two objects are connected. If you don't see this thread (line), choose View > Show Text Threads.


 Note
Even if there isn't enough text to fill them, you can still thread multiple type objects together.

Notice the out port () of the type object on the larger artboard and the in port () of the type object on the smaller artboard (both circled in the previous figure). The arrows in the ports indicate how the text is flowing from one to the other. If you delete the second type object, the text is pulled back into the original object as overflow text. Although not visible, the overflow text is not deleted.

 Tip
Another way to thread text between objects is to select an area type object, select the object (or objects) you want to link to, and then choose Type > Threaded Text > Create.

6. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Creating columns of text
You can easily create columns and rows of text by using the Type > Area Type Options command. This can be useful for a single type object with multiple columns (instead of separate threaded text areas) or for organizing text, like a table or simple chart, for instance. Next, you'll add a few columns to the existing type object on the larger artboard.


 Tip
To learn more about the large number of options in the Area Type Options dialog box, search for "Creating Text" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

1. While still on the 2 Card artboard, with the Selection tool (), click to select the text area that starts with the orange text "Lion Circle..."
2. Choose Type > Area Type Options. In the Area Type Options dialog box, in the Columns section, change the Number to 2 and select Preview. Click OK. The text won't change in appearance, but you should see the column guides.


 Note
If the cursor is still in the type object, you don't have to select the type object with the Selection tool to access the Area Type Options dialog box.

Next, you'll drag the bottom of the type object up to see the columns at work.
3. Drag the bottom, middle bounding point up until the text flows into the second column, like you see in the figure. Try to balance the text in the columns (make them even).

4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. Choose File > Save.

Formatting type
When it comes to text, you can format it using character and paragraph formatting, apply fill and stroke attributes to it, and change its transparency (how see-through it is). You can apply these changes to one character, a range of characters, or all characters in a type object that you select.

As you'll soon see, selecting the type object, rather than selecting the text inside, lets you apply global formatting options to all of the text in the object, including options from the Character and Paragraph panels, fill and stroke attributes, and transparency settings.
In this section, you'll discover how to change text attributes, such as size and font, and how to save that formatting as text styles.

Changing font family and font style
In this section, you'll apply a font to text. Aside from applying local fonts from your machine, Creative Cloud users can apply Typekit fonts that have been synced with their computer. Typekit is a subscription service offering access to a library of fonts for use in desktop applications such as InDesign or Microsoft Word, and on websites. A Typekit Portfolio plan is included with your Creative Cloud subscription, and free Creative Cloud members have access to a selection of fonts from Typekit for Web and desktop use. The fonts appear alongside other locally installed fonts in the Fonts list in Illustrator, as you'll soon see.


 Note
The Creative Cloud desktop application must be installed on your computer and you must have an Internet connection to initially sync fonts. The Creative Cloud desktop application is installed automatically when you install your first Creative Cloud application, like Illustrator.


 Note
For questions about Typekit font licensing, visit: http://help.typekit.com/customer/portal/articles/1341590-typekit-font-licensing. For more information on working with Typekit fonts, visit: http://helpx.adobe.com/creative-cloud/help/add-fonts-typekit.html.

First, you'll make sure that Typekit is set up to ensure that you can add fonts.
1. Launch the Creative Cloud for desktop application and sign in with your Adobe ID, if you aren't already (this requires an Internet connection). If you do not have the application installed, you can do so from here: https://creative.adobe.com/products/creative-cloud.
2. In the Creative Cloud desktop application, choose Assets > Fonts, and if you see "Turn Typekit On," click it to allow font syncing.

If you have already selected fonts to sync in your Web browser at this point, they will automatically begin syncing to your computer. Now you can start using Typekit fonts.
3. Back in Illustrator, choose 1 Flyer from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
4. Press Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows) twice to zoom in to the text in the center of the artboard.

 Note
If you miss the text, you will create point type. Choose Edit > Undo Type, if that's the case, and try again.

5. Select the Type tool () in the Tools panel, and with the pointer over the text, click to insert the cursor in the text. Choose Select > All, or press Command+A (Mac OS) or Ctrl+A (Windows), to select all the text in both threaded text objects.

 Tip
You will accidentally click with the Type tool and create a type object from time to time and want to get rid of the ones you aren't using. Illustrator has an easy way to clean up those objects: Object > Path > Clean Up.

6. Click the arrow to the right of the Font menu in the Control panel, and notice the fonts that appear in the menu. These fonts are those that are installed locally. Click the Add Fonts From Typekit button.

 Note
You may see the word "Character" instead of the Font menu listed in the Control panel. Click the word "Character" to reveal the Character panel, then click the Font menu.

A browser will open and should open the typekit.com website and log you in using your Adobe ID. If you do not have an Internet connection, you can choose any other font in the font menu instead.


 Note
If you are taken to the Typekit.com home page, you can simply click the Browse Fonts button.

7. Once on the Typekit.com website, click the Sans Serif button in the Classification options to sort the fonts, showing only available sans serif fonts.

 Note
If you don't see "+Use Fonts," you will most likely need to log in to the Typekit site using your Adobe ID.

8. Click the Desktop Use button if it's not already selected, to show all fonts that are available for use in desktop applications.

 Note
The fonts you see may not be the same and that's okay. If Adelle Sans is not available select another sans serif font.

9. Hover over the font "Adelle Sans" or another font and click "+Use Fonts."

10. In the pop-up that appears, click "Sync Selected Fonts." After the fonts have synced, click Close. You can close the browser and return to Illustrator.


 Tip
The fonts are synced to all computers where you've installed the Creative Cloud application and logged in. To view fonts, open the Creative Cloud desktop application and click the Assets > Fonts panel.

Once the fonts are synced to your computer (be patient, it may take a few minutes), a quick notification is usually displayed in your OS, indicating how many fonts have been added.
11. Back in Illustrator, click the arrow to the right of the Font menu in the Control panel, and click the Apply Typekit Filter button () to filter the font list (circled in the figure) and show only the Typekit font you just synced.
12. Click the arrow to the left of Adelle Sans in the menu, and choose Regular.
This sets the Font Family to Adelle Sans and the Font Style to Regular for all of the threaded text.


 Note
You may see other Typekit fonts (aside from the Adelle Sans font), and that's okay.

13. Scroll down the artboard so that you can see the text that starts with "Thursdays at..."
14. With the Type tool selected, click three times anywhere in the text to select the entire paragraph. Choose Type > Font to see a list of available fonts. Scroll down, and choose Adobe Garamond Pro > Bold Italic (or another font). If your font list is long, you may need to scroll quite far to find this font.


 Note
Be careful when selecting text. If you attempt to drag across the text to select it, you may wind up creating a new text object.

Next, you will use Font search to locate a font. This next method is the most dynamic method for selecting a font.
15. Insert the cursor in the text "Safari Zoo" to the far left of the "Thursdays at..." text, and choose Select > All.
16. With the text selected, click whatever font is listed in the Font menu in the Control panel to select the font name. Begin typing the letters ga.
Notice that a menu appears beneath where you are typing. Illustrator filters through the list and displays the font names that contain "ga," regardless of where "ga" is in the font name and regardless of whether it's capitalized. The Typekit font filter is still turned on from before, so you will turn it off next.


 Tip
Once a font name is selected, you can also click the X on the right side of the Font Family field to remove the current font shown.

17. Click the Clear Filter button () to see all of the available fonts again (see previous figure). Continue typing an "r" to make it gar, and the list is filtered further. In the menu that appears beneath where you are typing, click to select "Adobe Garamond Pro" and Adobe Garamond Pro Regular is applied to the selected text.
If you don't have Adobe Garamond Pro, feel free to choose something else. Your font list most likely won't be the same as you see in the figure and that's okay.


 Tip
You can click the Eyeglass icon () to the left of the Font Name field and choose to search the first word only. You can also open the Character panel (Window > Type > Character) and search for a font by typing the name.

When the menu of fonts appears, you could also use the arrow keys (Up and Down) to navigate the list of fonts. When the font you want is chosen, you can press Enter or Return to apply it. Font styles are specific to each font family. Although you may have the Adobe Garamond Pro font family on your system, you may not have the bold or italic styles of that family.

Illustrator Package (File > Package) and Typekit fonts
In Illustrator, you can package the content associated with an Illustrator document using the File > Package command. You'll learn about the Package command in Lesson 14, "Using Illustrator CC with Other Adobe Applications." Illustrator CC will not package Typekit desktop fonts, but will continue to package conventionally licensed fonts, except Chinese, Japanese, and Korean fonts, which have never been packaged by Illustrator. Recipients who are Creative Cloud members or Typekit subscribers can easily obtain the fonts through their online service.
If you have backsaved for a recipient who is using an older version of Illustrator, they can join Creative Cloud, get a Typekit subscription, or purchase the fonts directly from a font foundry. You can convert text to outlines, but it will become vector shapes and no longer be editable text. Since Typekit desktop fonts can be embedded in PDFs, this is the preferred format for print file submission.
—From Illustrator Help


Changing font size
By default, typeface size is measured in points (a point equals 1/72 of an inch). You can specify any typeface size from 0.1 point to 1296 points, in 0.001-point increments.

1. With the "Safari Zoo" text and Type tool () still selected, choose 36 pt from the preset sizes in the Font Size menu in the Control panel.


 Note
You may see the word "Character" instead of the Font Size field in the Control panel. Click the word "Character" to reveal the Character panel.

2. Select the 36 pt in the Font Size field in the Control panel and type 37. Press Enter or Return.
The type area will resize to fit the text vertically, but the text may wrap horizontally. Remember, type objects don't resize by default when the text resizes unless you turn on Autosize (like we did earlier).

 Tip
You can dynamically change the font size of selected text using keyboard shortcuts. To increase the font size in increments of 2 points, press Command+Shift+> (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Shift+> (Windows). To reduce the font size, press Command+Shift+< (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Shift+< (Windows).

3. Select the Selection tool (), and drag the middle-right point of the text object to the right until "Safari" is on one line and "Zoo" is on the next.
Make sure that the word "Zoo" is on its own line in the text object. You'll adjust the text later to make it look better. By dragging a bounding point, Autosize is turned off for the text area.

4. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
5. With the Selection tool, click the "ZOO TALES" text at the top of the artboard.
6. Select the 12 pt font size in the Font Size field in the Control panel and type 74. Press Enter or Return.

7. Drag the text object down, if need be, so that it's still on the artboard. Leave the text object selected.
Notice that the text object resizes since it's point type.

Changing font color
You can change the appearance of text by applying fills, strokes, and more. In this example, you will change the stroke and then the fill of selected text.

1. With the "ZOO TALES" text object still selected, click the Stroke color in the Control panel. When the Swatches panel appears, select White. The text stroke changes to white.
2. Change the Stroke weight of the text to 2 pt in the Control panel.

3. Select the Type tool () in the Tools panel, and click on the text in the threaded text frames in the middle of the artboard. Press Command+A (Mac OS) or Ctrl+A (Windows) to select all of the text.
4. Click the Fill color in the Control panel. When the Swatches panel appears, select White. Change the Font Size by typing 15 in the Control panel and pressing Enter or Return.


 Note
The text that once fit in the two threaded text objects no longer fits. That's okay, since you'll get it all to fit shortly.

5. Choose Select > Deselect.
6. Select the Selection tool (). Shift-click the two text objects, at the bottom of the artboard, that contain the words "Safari Zoo" and "Thursdays at..."
7. Change the Fill color in the Control panel to White.

The text will be white on the white artboard, which will make it difficult to see. In the next section, you will turn on layers to make it easier to see the text. You can either select the text or the text object to change most of the formatting, including fill and stroke.

 Note
You will find that, if a text object contains text with different formatting, like a heading and body text, selecting the text object will make the formatting the same.

8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose Chose File > Save.

Changing additional text attributes
You can change many additional text attributes in the Character panel, which you can access by clicking the underlined word "Character" in the Control panel or by choosing Window > Type > Character. Below are the formatting options available in the Character panel when all options are showing.

1. Open the Character panel by choosing Window > Type > Character. Click the double arrow on the left side of the Character panel tab to show more options.


A. Touch Type toolB. Font FamilyC. Font StyleD. Font SizeE. KerningF. Vertical ScaleG. Baseline ShiftH. All CapsI. Small CapsJ. LanguageK. SuperscriptL. SubscriptM. Text Anti-AliasingN. LeadingO. TrackingP. Horizontal ScaleQ. Character RotationR. StrikethroughS. Underline

In this section, you will apply some of the many possible attributes to experiment with the different ways you can format text. You can close the Character panel.
2. Click the Layers panel icon () to expand the panel. Click the visibility column to the left of the layer named Background and the layer named Tails. Click the Layers panel tab to collapse it.

3. Select the Type tool (), and click in either of the threaded text objects that contain the placed text. Choose Select > All.

 Tip
You could also just work with the Character panel (Window > Type > Character).

4. Click the word "Character" in the Control panel, and click the down arrow to the left of the Leading () field to change the value to 17 pt. Press the Escape key to hide the panel.
Leading is the vertical space between lines. Notice the change in the vertical distance between the lines. Adjusting the leading can be useful for fitting text into a text area. Like other Character panel options, you can also type in a value for the Leading.

5. Insert the cursor in the text "Safari Zoo" in the lower-left corner of the artboard. With the cursor in the text, triple-click to select the entire paragraph.
6. With the text selected, click the Tracking icon () in the Character panel to select the value in the Tracking field, and type -50. Press Enter or Return.
Tracking changes the spacing between characters. A positive value pushes the letters apart horizontally; a negative value pulls the letters closer together.


 Note
If you choose to open the Character panel (Window > Type > Character), you may need to click the double arrow next to the word "Character" in the panel tab to reveal more options, like you learned earlier.

7. Choose Type > Change Case > UPPERCASE and the text may wrap oddly in the type object.
8. With the Selection tool (), drag the lower-right corner of the "SAFARI ZOO" text object to the right and up until the text fits again on two lines.

9. Double-click the text that begins with "Thursdays at..." to switch to the Type tool. With the cursor in the text, triple-click to select the entire paragraph.
10. Change the Font Size to 33 pt in the Character panel. You'll need to either click the up arrow or type the value.
11. With the Selection tool, drag the lower-right corner of the "Thursdays at..." text object to the right and down until the text fits again on two lines.

12. With the text object still selected, click the Vertical Scale icon () in the Character panel to select the value and type 120. Press Enter or Return to accept the value. Leave the Character panel open.

13. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
14. Choose Select > Deselect.

Modifying text with the Touch Type tool
Using the Touch Type tool (), you can modify the properties of a character, like size, scale, and rotation, using a mouse cursor or touch controls. This is a very visual (and more fun) way of applying the character formatting properties: baseline shift, horizontal and vertical scale, rotation, and kerning.

Next, you are going to use the Touch Type tool to alter the appearance of the "ZOO TALES" headline at the top of the artboard.
1. Select the Zoom tool (), and click the headline "ZOO TALES" several times, to zoom in closely. Make sure you can still see all of the "ZOO TALES" text.
2. With the Selection tool (), click to select the "ZOO TALES" text object. Select whatever font is listed in the Font menu in the Control panel, and type Gar. In the menu that appears beneath where you are typing, click to select Adobe Garamond Pro Bold (or choose another font).
3. Click the Touch Type Tool button at the top of the Character panel.
A message appears at the top of the Document window telling you to click on a character to select it.


 Tip
You can also click and hold down the mouse button on the Type tool () in the Tools panel, and select the Touch Type tool () from the menu.

4. Click the letter "Z" to select it. A box with a dot above it appears around the letter. The different points around the box allow you to adjust the character in different ways, as you'll see.
5. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn them on.
6. Click and drag the upper-right corner of the box away from the center, to make the letter larger. Stop dragging when you see roughly 190% for width (W:) and height (H:) in the measurement label.

 Tip
By dragging the upper-left corner point of the box, you can adjust the vertical scale. By dragging the lower-right corner of the box, you can adjust the horizontal scale.

Notice that the movement is constrained—width and height change together proportionally. You just adjusted the horizontal scale and the vertical scale for the letter "Z" in the Character panel.
7. Look in the Character panel to see that the Horizontal Scale and Vertical Scale values are roughly 190%.

8. With the letter "Z" still selected, position the pointer in the center of the letter. Click and drag the letter down until the Baseline value shows approximately -24 pt in the gray measurement label.
You just edited the baseline shift of the letter in the Character panel.
9. Click the "O" to the right of the "Z," and drag the rotate handle (the circle above the letter) counterclockwise until you see approximately 20° in the measurement label.
10. Click and drag the upper-right corner of the box around the selected "O," away from the center, to make the letter larger. Stop dragging when you see roughly 125% for width (W:) and height (H:) in the measurement label.

11. Drag the letter "O" from the center, to the left, until it looks something like the figure.


 Tip
You can also nudge the selected letter with the arrow keys or press Shift+arrow key to move the letter in bigger increments.

12. Click to select the second letter "O" in "ZOO," and change the following using the Touch Type tool:
• Rotate the letter clockwise -35° (clockwise rotation shows a negative value).
• Click and drag (what was) the upper-right corner of the box, away from the center, until you see roughly 105% for width (W:) and height (H:) in the measurement label.
• Drag the letter from the center into the position you see in the figure.


 Note
There are limits to how far you can drag in any direction. Those limits are based on the kerning and baseline shift value limits.

13. Click to select the letter "T" in "TALES," and change the following using the Touch Type tool:
• Click and drag the upper-right corner of the box, away from the center, until you see roughly 150% for width (W:) and height (H:) in the measurement label.
• Drag the letter "T" from the center down and to the left (a bit closer to the second "O" in "ZOO"), into the position you see in the figure.
• Click and drag the upper-left point up until you see a Vertical Scale of 185%.

14. Click the letter "A" in "TALES." Drag the letter straight to the left to make it closer to the "T." See the figure for placement. Try not to drag up or down. The measurement label will show Baseline Shift: 0 pt.


Changing paragraph attributes
As with character attributes, you can set paragraph attributes, such as alignment or indenting, before you enter new type or to change the appearance of existing type. If you select several type paths and type containers, you can set attributes for them all at the same time. Most of this type of formatting is done in the Paragraph panel, which you can access by clicking the underlined word "Paragraph" in the Control panel or by choosing Window > Type > Paragraph.

Below are the formatting options available in the Paragraph panel.


A. AlignmentsB. Left indentC. First-line left indentD. Space before paragraphE. HyphenateF. Right indentG. Space after paragraph

Next, you'll add more space after all the paragraphs in the main text.
1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Position the pointer over the Touch Type tool () in the Tools panel, click and hold down the mouse button, and select the Type tool (). Insert the cursor in the text in middle of the artboard that begins with "The Animal Zoo welcomes..."
3. Click the word "Paragraph" in the Control panel to open the Paragraph panel.
4. Type 11 pt in the Space After Paragraph text field (in the lower-right corner), and press Enter or Return.
Setting a spacing value after paragraphs, rather than pressing the Return key, is useful for maintaining consistency and ease of editing later.

5. With the Selection tool (), click the text "SAFARI ZOO" and then Shift-click the text "Thursdays at 6:30 pm" to select the two text objects only. Choose Window > Type > Paragraph to open the Paragraph panel. In the panel, click the Align Center button ().


 Note
You can also click the Paragraph panel tab in the Character panel group, if the Character panel is still open.

6. Close the Paragraph panel group.
7. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Working with glyphs
Glyphs are characters within a certain typeface that may be harder to find, like a bullet point or a registration symbol. In Illustrator, the Glyphs panel is used to insert type characters, like trademark symbols (™). The panel shows all of the characters (glyphs) available for a given font.

To learn more about working with glyphs in Illustrator, search for "Glyphs" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).


Resizing and reshaping type objects
You can create unique type object shapes by reshaping them using a variety of methods, including reshaping objects using the Direct Selection tool. In this next section, you'll reshape and resize type objects to better fit text in them.

1. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
At times, you may need to reflow the text between text objects. Next, you will learn how to resize, unlink, relink, and reshape type objects.
2. With the Selection tool (), click the text in the main type object on the larger artboard that is threaded to select it. Drag the right, middle point to the vertical guide in the center of the artboard.

3. Double-click the out port () in the lower-right corner of the text object (where the thread [blue line] is coming out).


 Note
It may be difficult to double-click on the out port since you are zoomed out. You may wish to zoom in closer to the type area.

Because the two text objects were threaded, double-clicking the out port of the first text object (or the in port of the second type object) breaks the connection between them. Any text threaded between the type objects flows back into the first one. The other text object is still there, but it has no stroke or fill.
4. Using the Selection tool, drag the bottom, middle handle of the bounding box down until the text "...favorite stuffed animal!" is the last text in the object. The text object changes in size vertically.

5. With the Selection tool, click the out port () in the lower-right corner of the type object. The pointer changes to the loaded text icon ().
6. Position the loaded text icon () to the right of the existing type object and down from its top edge (see the figure). Click, and a new type object is created that should roughly fit into the aqua guide box. Leave the new type object selected.

When type objects are threaded, you can move them anywhere and still maintain the connection between them. When type objects are resized, especially those in the beginning of the thread, text can reflow. Now you will link the new type object to the type object on the Card artboard.
7. With the Selection tool, click the out port () in the lower-right corner of the new type object. The pointer changes to the loaded text icon ().
8. Choose View > Outline to see the artwork edges.

 Note
It may be difficult to click the out port since there is other artwork there. You can always move the type object, click the out port, and continue on to the next steps. You can move it back into position later.

9. On the 2 Card artboard, position the loaded text icon on the edge (boundary) of the existing type object (see the figure), and click when the pointer changes to this ().

10. Choose View > Preview.
11. Using the Selection tool, on the 1 Flyer artboard, drag the bottom, middle handle of the right-hand type object up until the text "...for supporting this program." is the last text in the object. The text object changes in size vertically.

12. Select the Type tool () and position the pointer over the threaded text on the 2 Card artboard. When the cursor changes to (), click three times to select the paragraph.
13. Change the Font Size to 10 pt in the Control panel. Click the word "Character" in the Control panel and, in the Character panel, change the Leading to 15 pt.

 Note
You may need to adjust the shape of the type area or the size/leading of the text to fit the last paragraph in the type object, if you see the overset icon ().

14. Select the Direct Selection tool (). Click the upper-right corner of the type object to select the anchor point. Drag that point to the left to adjust the shape of the path to fit the orange shape. As you drag, press the Shift key. Release the mouse button and then the Shift key when finished.

15. Choose File > Save.

Creating and applying text styles
Styles allow you to format text consistently and are helpful when text attributes need to be updated globally. Once a style is created, you only need to edit the saved style, and then all text formatted with that style is updated.

Illustrator provides two types of text styles:
• Paragraph—Retains character and paragraph attributes and applies them to an entire paragraph.
• Character—Retains character attributes and applies them to selected text.

Creating and applying a paragraph style
First, you will create a paragraph style for the body copy.

1. Choose 1 Flyer from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window (if it's not already chosen).
2. With the Type tool () selected, insert the cursor anywhere in the first paragraph in the first threaded type object that starts with "The Animal Zoo...".
You do not need to select text to create a paragraph style, but you do have to place the text insertion point in the text that has the attributes you want to save.
3. Choose Window > Type > Paragraph Styles, and click the Create New Style button () at the bottom of the Paragraph Styles panel.
This creates a new paragraph style in the panel, called "Paragraph Style 1." This style captures the character and paragraph formatting from the paragraph.

4. Double-click directly on the style name "Paragraph Style 1" in the list of styles. Change the name of the style to Body, and press Enter or Return to edit the name inline.
By double-clicking the style to edit the name, you are also applying the new style to the paragraph (where the cursor is). This means that if you edit the Body paragraph style, this paragraph will update as well.

5. With the Type tool selected, click and drag from before the first word in the first paragraph that starts with the text "The Animal Zoo..." to after the last word "...for supporting this program." in the second "column" to select it.

 Note
Make sure not to select the threaded text on the artboard 2 Card.

6. Click the Body style in the Paragraph Styles panel.

Notice that a plus sign (+) appears to the right of the Body style name. The plus sign indicates that the style has an override. An override is any formatting that doesn't match the attributes defined by the style, for example, if you changed the font size for the selected paragraph.
7. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and select the Body style again in the Paragraph Styles panel to overwrite existing attributes on the selected text.
The text attributes of the Body style are applied to the selected text, including the Space After value, so the text may no longer all fit in the two columns.

 Note
If you place a Microsoft Word document and choose to keep the formatting, the styles used in the Word document may be brought into the Illustrator document and may appear in the Paragraph Styles panel.

8. Choose Select > Deselect.
9. Select the Selection tool (), and click to select the type object on the right (the right column). Click and drag the bottom bounding point down until the text "supporting this program" is the last to appear in the column (if necessary).

10. Choose Select > Deselect.

Editing a paragraph style
After creating a paragraph style, you can easily edit the style formatting. Then anywhere the style has been applied, the formatting will be updated automatically.

1. Double-click to the right of Body style name in the Paragraph Styles panel list to open the Paragraph Style Options dialog box.

 Tip
You can also choose Paragraph Style Options from the Paragraph Styles panel menu ().

2. Select the Indents And Spacing category on the left side of the dialog box.
3. Change the Space After to 8 pt.
Since Preview is selected by default, you can move the dialog box out of the way to see the text change.

4. Click OK.
5. Choose File > Save.
There are many options for working with paragraph styles, most of which are found in the Paragraph Styles panel menu, including duplicating, deleting, and editing paragraph styles.

 Note
You may need to click and drag the bottom bounding point up until the text "supporting this program" is the last to appear in the column.


Creating and applying a character style
Character styles, unlike paragraph styles, can only be applied to selected text and can only contain character formatting. Next, you will create a character style from text styling within the columns of text.

1. Choose View > Zoom In, twice, to zoom in to the threaded text in the center.
2. Using the Type tool (), in the first paragraph, select "The Animal Zoo."
3. Click the Fill color, and select the swatch named "gold" in the Control panel.
4. Click the word "Character" in the Control panel and choose Italic from the Font Style menu, and then click the Underline button () to underline the text.


 Note
If you chose a font other than Adelle Sans, and don't see Italic, try choosing another font style.

5. In the Paragraph Styles panel group, click the Character Styles panel tab.
6. In the Character Styles panel, Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the Create New Style button () at the bottom of the Character Styles panel.
Option-clicking (Mac OS) or Alt-clicking (Windows) the Create New Style button in the Character or Paragraph Styles panel allows you to edit the style options before it is added to the panel.
7. Name the style Emphasis, and click OK.
The style records the attributes applied to your selected text.

8. With the text still selected, Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the style named Emphasis in the Character Styles panel to assign the style to that text so that it will update if the style changes.

 Note
You must select the entire phrase rather than just placing the cursor in the text.

9. In the next column (text object), select the text "This program is free" and Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the style named Emphasis in the Character Styles panel to apply it.

10. Choose Select > Deselect.

Editing a character style
After creating a character style, you can easily edit the style formatting, and, anywhere the style is applied, the formatting will be updated automatically.


 Note
If the Font Family field is blank, choose Adelle Sans (or the font you chose), then you can select a font style.

1. Double-click to the right of the Emphasis style name in the Character Styles panel (not the style name itself). In the Character Style Options dialog box, make sure that Preview is selected. Click the Basic Character Formats category on the left side of the dialog box, and choose Regular from the Font Style menu. Click OK.

2. Choose File > Save.

Sampling text formatting
Using the Eyedropper tool (), you can quickly sample type attributes and copy them to text without creating a style.

1. Using the Type tool (), select the text "dressed in your pajamas and slippers" in the first column of text.
2. Select the Eyedropper tool () in the Tools panel, and click in the first text "The Animal Zoo." A letter "T" appears above the Eyedropper pointer.
The attributes are immediately applied to your selected text, along with the Emphasis character style.

3. Choose Select > Deselect, and then select the style named [Normal Character Style] in the Character Styles panel. Close the Character Styles panel group.

 Note
Clicking [Normal Character Style] ensures that any new text you add to the document will not have the style named Emphasis applied.

4. Choose File > Save. Leave the file open.

Warping text
You can create some great design effects by warping text into different shapes using envelopes. You can make an envelope out of an object on your artboard, or you can use a preset warp shape or a mesh grid as an envelope. As you explore warping with envelopes, you'll also discover that you can use envelopes on any object except graphs, guides, or linked objects.


 Tip
There are several additional ways to warp content like text, including with a mesh and with an object you create. To learn more about these other methods, search for "Reshape using envelopes" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).


Reshaping text with a preset envelope warp
Illustrator comes with a series of preset warp shapes that you can warp text with. Next, you'll apply one of the preset warp shapes that Illustrator provides.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window. Select the Zoom tool () and click the "SAFARI ZOO" text in the lower-left corner of the artboard several times.
2. With the Type tool (), select the word "ZOO" and change the Font Size to 66 pt in the Control panel.
3. Adjust the type object size just large enough to show all of the text with the Selection tool (), if the word "ZOO" doesn't fit.

 Note
The same visual result can be achieved by choosing Object > Envelope Distort > Make With Warp. For more information about envelopes, see "Reshape using envelopes" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

4. With the Type tool, select the word "ZOO" again, and click the word "Character" in the Control panel to open the Character panel. Change the Leading value to 52 pt.

5. Select the Selection tool and make sure that the text object is selected. Click the Make Envelope button () in the Control panel (not the arrow to the right). In the Warp Options dialog box, select Preview. The text appears as an arc.
6. Choose Arc Upper from the Style menu. Drag the Bend slider to the right to see it bend up further. You can experiment with many combinations. Drag the Horizontal and Vertical Distortion sliders to see the effect on the text. When you are finished experimenting, drag the Distortion sliders to 0%, make sure that the Bend is 20%, and then click OK.

7. Drag the envelope object (warped text) into the approximate center of the black sign shape.

Editing the envelope warp
If you want to make any changes, you can edit the text and shape that make up the envelope warp object separately. Next, you will edit the text and then the warp shape.

1. With the envelope object still selected, click the Edit Contents button () in the Control panel. This is how you edit the text in the warped shape.
2. Make sure that Smart Guides are on (View > Smart Guides).
3. Using the Type tool (), position the cursor over the warped text. Notice that another copy of the text appears in blue. The Smart Guides show you the original unwarped text in blue. Click the word "SAFARI" to insert the cursor, and then click twice to select the word "SAFARI."


 Tip
If you double-click with the Selection tool instead of with the Type tool, you enter Isolation mode. This is another way to edit the text within the envelope warp object. Press the Escape key to exit Isolation mode.

4. Type ANIMAL, and then press Shift+Enter or Shift+Return to add a soft return after the word and to break the word "ZOO" to the next line.
Notice that the text automatically warps in the envelope shape.


 Tip
To take the text out of the warped shape, select the text with the Selection tool and choose Object > Envelope Distort > Release. This gives you two objects: the type object and an arc upper shape.

You can also edit the preset shape, which is what you'll do next.
5. Select the Selection tool (), and make sure that the envelope object is still selected. Click the Edit Envelope button () in the Control panel.

 Note
Changing the warp style will most likely move the warp object on the artboard.

Notice the options for the envelope warp object in the Control panel. You can choose another warp shape from the Style menu and then change the warp options, like Horizontal, Vertical, and Bend. These are the same options you saw in the Warp Options dialog box when you first created the envelope warp.
6. Change the Bend to 28% in the Control panel. Make sure that the H (horizontal) Distortion is 0 and the V (vertical) Distortion is 0.

7. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn them off.
8. Select the Selection tool, and Shift-drag the lower-right-corner bounding point away from the center to make the object a bit larger. Make sure that the text stays within the black sign shape. See the next figure for placement help.

9. Shift-click the black sign shape to select both objects, and then release the Shift key. Click the black sign shape once more to make it the key object. Click the Horizontal Align Center button (), and then click the Vertical Align Center button () to align the warped text to the black sign shape.


Working with type on a path
In addition to having text in point and type areas, you can also have type along a path. Text can flow along the edge of an open or closed path and can lead to some really creative ways to display text.


Creating type on a path
First, you'll insert some text on an open path.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window. You may wish to zoom in further to see the text you type.
2. With the Selection tool (), select the black curved path on top of the brown monkey tail.
When creating a new type object, this resets the formatting to default.
3. With the Type tool (), position the cursor over the middle of the path to see an insertion point with an intersecting wavy path () (see the figure). Click when this cursor appears.
The text starts where you click the path. Also, the stroke attributes of the path change to None and a cursor appears.

4. Choose Window > Type > Paragraph Styles to open the panel. Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the [Normal Paragraph Style].
5. Type the text Bedtime Stories With Your Wildest Friends. Note that the new text follows the path.
6. With the Type tool, click three times on the new text to select it.

 Note
If the text is yellow and underlined it means that the character style is applied. Select the text and Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) click the [Normal Character Style] in the Character Styles panel.

7. Select the Eyedropper tool () in the Tools panel, and click in the text that begins, "Thursdays at..." A letter "T" appears above the Eyedropper pointer (without the Caps Lock key selected).
The text formatting from the "Thursdays at..." text applies to the text on the path. This makes the text not fit on the path, so the overset icon () in the out port appears.

8. Click the word "Character" in the Control panel, and change the Vertical Scale to 100% in the Character panel. Press the Escape key to hide the panel.
9. Click the Align Left button () in the Control panel.

 Note
If you don't see the text align options in the Control panel, click the word "Paragraph" to reveal the Paragraph panel.

Next, you'll reposition the text on the path so that all of the text appears.
10. Select the Selection tool, and position the pointer over the line on the left edge of the text (just to the left of the "B"). When you see this cursor (), click and drag to the left—all the way to the left end of the path.

11. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

 Tip
With the path or the text on the path selected, you can choose Type > Type On A Path > Type On A Path Options to set more options.


Creating type on a closed path
Next, you will add text around a circle.

1. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click the yellow paw print three times to zoom in.
2. With the Selection tool (), Shift-click the threaded type object and the yellow paw print to select both and choose Object > Hide > Selection.
3. Select the Type tool (), and position the pointer over the edge of the white circle. The Type cursor () changes to a Type cursor with a circle (). This indicates that, if you click (don't click), text will be placed inside of the circle, creating a type object in the shape of a circle.

 Note
Instead of pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key to allow the Type tool to type on a path, you can select the Type On A Path tool () by holding down the Type tool in the Tools panel.

4. While pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, position the pointer over the left side of the circle. The insertion point with an intersecting wavy path () appears. Click and type ZOO CIRCLE. The text flows on the circular path. Click three times on the text to select it.

5. With the text still selected, in the Control panel, change the font size to 16 pt, the Font Style to Bold (the Font Family should already be Adobe Garamond Pro), and the Fill color to the swatch named gold.
Next, you will adjust the position of the text.

 Note
Brackets appear at the beginning of the type, at the end of the path, and at the midpoint between the start and end brackets. All of these brackets can be adjusted to reposition the text in the path.

6. Select the Selection tool in the Tools panel. Position the pointer over the line on the left end of the text (to the left of the word "ZOO"). That line is called a bracket. When you see this cursor (), with an arrow pointing to the right, drag up around the circle in a clockwise fashion. See the figure for position.


Editing type on a path options
When you create type on a path, you can set options to change the appearance of the text, including effects, alignment, and spacing. Next, you'll edit the type on a path options for the text on the circle.


 Note
To learn about the Type On A Path options, search for "Creating type on a path" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

1. With the path type object selected with the Selection tool, choose Type > Type On A Path > Type On A Path Options. In the Type On A Path Options dialog box, select Preview and change the following options:
• Choose Skew from the Effect menu, and then choose Rainbow.
• Align To Path: Ascender
• Spacing: -18 pt

2. Click OK.
3. With the Selection tool (), position the pointer over the line on the left end of the text (to the left of the word "ZOO"). When you see this cursor (), drag down around the circle in a counterclockwise fashion. See the figure.

4. Choose Object > Show All and then choose Select > Deselect.

Wrapping text around an object
In Illustrator, you can easily wrap text around objects, like type objects, imported images, and vector artwork, to avoid text running over those objects or to create interesting design effects. Next, you will wrap text around the text on a path object.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click directly on the "ZOO CIRCLE" text to select it. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front.

 Note
To wrap text around an object, the object that the text is to wrap around must be in the same layer as the text and must be located above the text in the layer hierarchy.

2. Choose Object > Text Wrap > Make. Click OK if a dialog box appears. The text in the column wraps around the text on a path shape.
If you move the object with the text wrap applied, the text responds and wraps differently.

3. Choose Object > Text Wrap > Text Wrap Options. In the Text Wrap Options dialog box, change Offset to 13 pt and select Preview to see the change.


 Note
Your text may wrap differently, and that's okay.

4. Click OK.
5. With the Selection tool () selected, drag the bottom, middle point of the threaded text box down to make sure that the text "...for supporting this program" is the last showing.

6. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, and then choose Select > Deselect.

Creating text outlines
Converting text to outlines means converting text into vector shapes that you can edit and manipulate as you would any other graphic object. Text outlines are useful for changing the look of large display type, but they are rarely useful for body text or other type at small sizes. The file recipient doesn't need to have your fonts installed to open and view the file correctly.

When you create outlines from text, you should consider that text as no longer editable. Also, bitmap fonts and outline-protected fonts cannot be converted to outlines, and outlining text that is less than 10 points in size is not recommended. When type is converted to outlines, the type loses its hints—instructions built into outline fonts to adjust their shape to display or print optimally at many sizes. You must also convert all type in a selection to outlines; you cannot convert a single letter within a type object.
Next, you will convert the main heading to outlines and position content.

 Note
To keep your original text, you can save a layer with the original text (and hide the layer).

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click the heading text "Zoo Tales" at the top of the artboard to select it. Choose Type > Create Outlines. Drag it into position like you see in the figure (if it's not already there).

The text is no longer linked to a particular font. Instead, it is now artwork, much like any other vector art in your illustration.
2. With the Selection tool, drag the text "Thursdays at 6:30 pm" at the bottom of the artboard into position, like you see in the following figure.
3. Choose View > Guides > Hide Guides, and then choose Select > Deselect.

4. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.

Review questions
1. Name two methods for creating a text area in Adobe Illustrator.

2. What does the Touch Type tool () let you do?
3. What is overflow text?
4. What is text threading?
5. What is the difference between a character style and a paragraph style?
6. What is the advantage of converting text to outlines?

Review answers
1. The following methods can be used for creating text areas:

• With the Type tool (), click the artboard and start typing when the cursor appears. A text area is created to accommodate the text.
• With the Type tool, drag to create a text area. Type when a cursor appears.
• With the Type tool, click a path or closed shape to convert it to text on a path, or click in a text area. Option-clicking (Mac OS) or Alt-clicking (Windows) when crossing over the stroke of a closed path creates text around the shape.
2. The Touch Type tool () allows you to visually edit certain character formatting options for individual characters in text. You can edit the character rotation, kerning, baseline shift, and horizontal and vertical scale of text.
3. Overflow text is text that does not fit within an area type object or path. A red plus sign () in an out port indicates that the object contains additional text.
4. Text threading allows you to flow text from one object to another by linking type objects. Linked type objects can be of any shape; however, the text must be entered in an area or along a path (not at a point).
5. A character style can be applied to selected text only. A paragraph style is applied to an entire paragraph. Paragraph styles are best for indents, margins, and line spacing.
6. Converting text to outlines eliminates the need to send the fonts along with the Illustrator file when sharing with others.







8. Organizing Your Artwork with Layers

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Work with the Layers panel.
• Create, rearrange, and lock layers and sublayers.
• Move objects between layers.
• Copy and paste objects and their layers from one file to another.
• Merge layers into a single layer.
• Locate objects in the Layers panel.
• Isolate content in a layer.
• Make a layer clipping mask.
• Apply an appearance attribute to objects and layers.

This lesson takes approximately 45 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



Layers let you organize your work into distinct levels that can be edited and viewed individually or together. Every Adobe Illustrator CC document has at least one layer. Creating multiple layers in your artwork lets you easily control how artwork is printed, displayed, selected, and edited.


Getting started
In this lesson, you'll organize the artwork for several shirts as you explore the various ways to use the Layers panel.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of this book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Choose File > Open, and open the L8_end.ai file in the Lesson08 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.

4. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
5. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the Workspace menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.


Understanding layers
Layers are like invisible folders to help you hold and manage all of the items (some of which can be difficult to select or track) that make up your artwork. If you shuffle those folders, you change the stacking order of the items in your artwork. (You learned about stacking order in Lesson 2, "Techniques for Selecting Artwork.")

The structure of layers in your document can be as simple or as complex as you want. When you create a new Illustrator document, all of the content you create is organized in a single layer. However, you can create new layers and sublayers (like subfolders) to organize your artwork, as you'll learn about in this lesson.
1. Click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace, or choose Window > Layers.
In addition to organizing content, the Layers panel offers an easy way to select, hide, lock, and change your artwork's appearance attributes.
In the next figure, the Layers panel you see will not look exactly the same, and that's okay. You can refer back to this figure as you progress through the lesson.


A. Layer colorB. Visibility columnC. Template layer iconD. Edit column (lock/unlock)E. Disclosure triangle (expand/collapse)F. Locate ObjectG. Make/Release Clipping MaskH. Create New SublayerI. Create New LayerJ. Delete SelectionK. Target columnL. Selection columnM. Current layer indicator (small triangle)

To begin working, you'll open an existing art file that is incomplete.
2. Choose File > Open, and open the L8_start.ai file in the Lessons > Lesson08 folder on your hard disk.
The Missing Fonts dialog box will most likely appear, indicating that a font was used in the file that Illustrator can't find. The file uses a Typekit font that you most likely don't have synced with your machine, so you will fix the missing font before moving on.

3. In the Missing Fonts dialog box, a single font (CreteRound-Regular) will appear in the list. Ensure that Sync is selected in the Sync column and click Sync Fonts. The font should be synced with your machine, and you should see a success message in the Missing Fonts dialog box. Click Close.


 Note
If the font is unable to sync, you may not have an Internet connection or you may need to launch the Creative Cloud desktop application, sign in with your Adobe ID, choose Assets > Fonts, and click Turn Typekit On. If you went through Lesson 7, "Adding Type to a Poster," you would have this already turned on. For more information, visit http://helpx.adobe.com/creative-cloud/help/add-fonts-typekit.html.

This should sync the Typekit font to your machine and ensure that the font shows as intended in Illustrator. If you see a warning message in the Missing Fonts dialog box or cannot select Sync, you can click Find Fonts to replace the font with a local font. In the Find Font dialog box, make sure that "CreteRound Regular" is selected in the Fonts in Document section and choose System from the Replace With Font From menu. This shows all of the local fonts that are available to Illustrator. Select a font from the Fonts In System section and click Change All to replace the font. Click Done.
4. Choose File > Save As, name the file Shirts.ai, and select the Lesson08 folder. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or the Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and then click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.
5. Choose Select > Deselect (if available), and then choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

Creating layers and sublayers
By default, every document begins with one layer, named "Layer 1." As you create artwork, you can rename and add layers and sublayers at any time. Placing objects on separate layers lets you more easily select and edit them. For example, by placing type on a separate layer, you can change the type all at once without affecting the rest of the artwork.

Next, you'll change the default layer name, and then create new layers using different methods. The idea for this project is to organize the "Shirt Front" and back content so you can more easily work with it later.
1. If the Layers panel isn't visible, click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace, or choose Window > Layers. Layer 1 (the default name for the first layer) is highlighted, indicating that it is active.
2. In the Layers panel, double-click the layer name "Layer 1" to edit it inline. Type Shirt Front, and then press Enter or Return.

 Note
If you double-click just to the right or left of a layer name, the Layer Options dialog box will open. You can also change the layer name there.

Instead of keeping all of the content on one single layer, you'll create several layers and sublayers to better organize the content and to make it easier to select content later.

3. Click the Create New Layer button () at the bottom of the Layers panel.

 Tip
You can easily delete a layer by selecting the layer or sublayer and clicking the Delete Selection button () at the bottom of the Layers panel. This deletes the layer or sublayer and all content on it.

Layers and sublayers that aren't named are numbered in sequence. For example, the second layer is named Layer 2. When a layer or sublayer in the Layers panel contains other items, a disclosure triangle () appears to the left of the layer or sublayer name. You can click the disclosure triangle to show or hide the contents. If no triangle appears, the layer has no content on it.

4. Double-click to the right or left of the layer name "Layer 2" to open the Layer Options dialog box. Change the name to Shirt Back and notice all of the other options available. Click OK.

By default, the new layer is added above the currently selected layer ("Shirt Front") in the Layers panel and becomes active. Notice that the new layer has a different layer color (a light red) to the left of the layer name. This will become more important later, as you select content.
Next, you will create a layer and name it in one step, using a modifier key.

 Tip
Choosing New Layer from the Layers panel menu () will also create a new layer and open the Layer Options dialog box.

5. Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the Create New Layer button () at the bottom of the Layers panel. In the Layer Options dialog box, change the name to Pattern Front, and then click OK.

6. Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the Create New Layer button () at the bottom of the Layers panel. In the Layer Options dialog box, change the name to Labels, and then click OK.
7. Drag the "Pattern Front" layer to the Create New Layer button. This creates a copy of the layer and names it "Pattern Front copy." Double-click the layer name and change it to Pattern Back.

Next, you'll create a sublayer, which is a layer nested within a layer.
8. Click the layer named "Shirt Front" once, and then click the Create New Sublayer button () at the bottom of the Layers panel to create a new sublayer in the Shirt Front layer.


 Note
Depending on your operating system, the selection color of objects (the bounding box) may be different colors, and that's okay.

9. Drag the left edge of the Layers panel to the left to make it wider so that you can more easily read the layer names.
10. Double-click the new sublayer name (Layer 6, in our case), change the name to Front Collar, and then press Enter or Return.
The new sublayer appears directly beneath its main layer, "Shirt Front", and is selected. Creating a new sublayer opens the selected layer to show existing sublayers. Sublayers are used to organize content within a layer without grouping or ungrouping content.

 Note
To create a new sublayer and name it in one step, Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the Create New Sublayer button or choose New Sublayer from the Layers panel menu to open the Layer Options dialog box.

11. Click the disclosure triangle () to the left of the "Shirt Front" layer to hide the content of the layer.


Layers and color
By default, Illustrator assigns a unique color to each layer in the Layers panel. The color displays next to the layer name in the panel. The same color displays in the artwork bounding box, path, anchor points, and center point of a selected object.

You can use this color to quickly locate an object's corresponding layer in the Layers panel, and you can change the layer color to suit your needs.
—From Illustrator Help


Editing layers and objects
By rearranging the layers in the Layers panel, you can change the stacking order of objects in your artwork. On an artboard, objects in layers that are higher in the Layers panel list are in front of objects located on layers lower in the list, and each layer has its own stacking order as well. Layers are useful for a variety of reasons, including the ability to move objects between layers and sublayers to organize and more easily select your artwork.


Locating layers
When working in artwork, there may be times when you select content on the artboard and then want to locate that same content in the Layers panel. This can help you to determine how content is organized.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the yellow/green sleeves on the shirt below the word "Front." Click the Locate Object button () at the bottom of the Layers panel to reveal the group of objects within the Layers panel.

Clicking the Locate Object button will open the layer so that the layer content can be seen, and the Layers panel will scroll, if necessary, to reveal the selected content. With an Illustrator file that has a lot of layered content, this can be helpful. In the Layers panel, you will see the selection indicator to the far right of the <Group> object (it's the small colored box to the far right in the figure that the arrow is pointing to), as well as the two <Path> objects in the group.
2. Double-click the <Group> text and rename it Front Sleeves.
By default, when content is grouped, a group object is created that contains the grouped content. Look on the left end of the Control panel to see the word "Group" in the Selection Indicator. Renaming a group doesn't change the fact that it is still a group.

3. Choose Select > Deselect.
4. Click the disclosure triangle () for the main "Shirt Front" layer to hide the contents of the layer. The "Shirt Front" layer is the only layer with a disclosure triangle because it's currently the only layer with content on it.

Moving layers and content between layers
Now you'll move the artwork to the different layers, to which you'll later add content from another Illustrator file.

1. Choose View > Outline Mode.
2. In the artwork, using the Selection tool (), drag a marquee selection across the artwork for the "Back" shirt content, to select it (see the figure for what to select).

In the Layers panel, notice that the "Shirt Front" layer name has the selected-art indicator (color square). Also notice that the color of the bounding box, paths, and anchor points of the selected artwork matches the color of the layer. If you want to move selected artwork from one layer to another, you can either drag the selected-art indicator to the right of each sublayer or drag the selected-art indicator to the right of the layer name.
3. Drag the selected-art indicator (the blue box) from the right of the "Shirt Front" layer name straight up to the right of the target icon () on the "Shirt Back" layer.
This action moves all of the selected artwork to the "Shirt Back" layer. The color of the bounding box, paths, and anchor points in the artwork changes to the color of the "Shirt Back" layer, which is red.

4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. Choose View > Preview.
6. Click the disclosure triangle () to the left of the "Shirt Front" layer to show the layer content. Drag the bottom of the Layers panel down to see more layers. Click the <Group> layer that contains the "Front" type shapes, and then press the Shift key and click the "Back" <Group> object to select both layers without selecting the artwork on the artboard. Drag either <Group> object to the "Labels" layer at the top of the list. When the Labels layer is highlighted, release the mouse button.
This is another way to move artwork between layers. Any content that is dragged to another layer is automatically at the top of the layer stack.

7. Click the disclosure triangle () to the left of the "Shirt Front" layer to hide the layer contents.

 Tip
Keeping layers and sublayers closed can make it easier to navigate content in the Layers panel.

8. Shift-click the "Shirt Front" and "Shirt Back" layers to select them. Drag either of them up, below the Labels layer in the Layers panel. When a line appears below the Labels layer, release the mouse button.


 Note
Be careful not to drag the layer into one of the other layers. If the Side panel layer disappears, you can choose Edit > Undo Reorder Layers and then try again.

9. With the Selection tool, click the white shirt shape for the shirt labeled "Front" on the artboard. Choose Edit > Cut.
10. Select the "Pattern Front" layer in the Layers panel, and choose Edit > Paste In Front.
The cut artwork is pasted onto the layer named "Pattern Front."


 Note
The white shirt shape appears behind the yellow sleeves because it's pasted onto the "Pattern Front" layer. The yellow sleeves are on the "Shirt Front" layer which is higher in the layer order.

11. Click to select the other white shirt shape under the "Back" label on the artboard.
12. Choose Edit > Cut, select the "Pattern Back" layer, and choose Edit > Paste In Front.
13. Choose Select > Deselect.

Duplicating layer content
In previous lessons, you've worked with the Edit > Copy and Edit > Cut commands. You can also use the Layers panel as another method for duplicating layers and other content. Next, you'll duplicate content between layers.

1. Click the disclosure triangle () to the left of the "Shirt Front" layer to show the layer content.
2. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and click the "Front Sleeves" sublayer to select the content on the artboard.
3. While still pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, drag the Front Sleeves row up onto the "Shirt Back" layer. When the layer is highlighted and a plus sign (+) appears to the right of the pointer, release the mouse button, and then release the key. Leave the artwork selected on the artboard.
This copies the content onto the "Shirt Back" layer.

Notice that the new copied artwork has a red color on the bounding box, paths, and anchor points, indicating that it's on the "Shirt Back" layer now. Dragging with the modifier key copies the selected content. This is the same as selecting the content on the artboard and choosing Edit > Copy, selecting the "Shirt Back" layer in the Layers panel, and then choosing Edit > Paste In Place.

 Tip
You can also Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the selected-art indicator to duplicate content. You can also select the Front Sleeves row in the Layers panel and choose Duplicate "Front Sleeves" from the Layers panel menu to create a copy on the same content.

4. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of the "Shirt Front" layer to hide the contents, and click the disclosure triangle to the left of the "Shirt Back" layer to see its contents.
5. With the yellow/green sleeves artwork still selected, Shift-click the middle of the white shirt shape on the right side of the artboard to select both objects. Release the Shift key. Click again on the white shirt shape to make it the key object. Click the Horizontal Align Center button () in the Control panel to align the objects to each other.

6. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back. In the Layers panel, notice that the stacking order of the sublayers is now different, reflecting how the artwork is arranged on the artboard.

7. Choose Select > Deselect.

Merging layers
To streamline your artwork, you can merge layers, sublayers, content, or groups to combine the contents into one layer or sublayer. Note that items will be merged into the layer or group that you selected last. Next, you will merge content into a new layer, and then merge a few sublayers into one.


 Tip
You can also Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) layers or sublayers in the Layers panel to select multiple, nonsequential layers.

1. In the content for the "Shirt Back" layer in the Layers panel, click the top <Path> object in the Layers panel to highlight it, and then Shift-click the bottom <Path> object in the layer to select four <Path> objects.

 Note
Layers can merge only with other layers that are on the same hierarchical level in the Layers panel. Likewise, sublayers can only merge with other sublayers that are in the same layer and on the same hierarchical level. Objects can't be merged with other objects.

2. Click the Layers panel menu icon (), and choose Collect In New Layer to create a new layer and put the <Path> objects in it.
The objects in the new layer retain their original stacking order.
3. Double-click the thumbnail to the left of or directly to the right of the new layer name. In the Layer Options dialog box, change the name to Shirt Back Stitching and choose Light Red from the Color menu. Click OK.

Changing the layer color to match the main layer isn't necessary. The Layer Options dialog box has a lot of the options you've already worked with, including naming layers, Preview or Outline mode, locking layers, and showing and hiding layers. You can also deselect the Print option in the Layer Options dialog box, and any content on that layer will not print.

 Tip
Choose Merge Selected from the Layers panel menu to merge selected content into a single layer. The last layer you select determines the name and color of the merged layer.

Next, you'll do the same thing to the stitching artwork on the "Shirt Front" layer.
4. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of the "Shirt Back" layer to hide its contents, and click the disclosure triangle to the left of the "Shirt Front" layer to show the contents.
5. Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) the four <Path> objects on the "Shirt Front" layer, like you see in the figure, to select them all (they have shaded circles to the far right of their names).
6. Choose Collect In New Layer from the Layers panel menu () to create a new layer and put the <Path> objects in it.

7. Double-click the layer name and change the name to Shirt Front Stitching. Press Enter or Return to accept the name.

8. In the "Shirt Front" layer, drag the <Path> object up into the <Group> object above it.
The <Path> object is now a part of the group (<Group>), but it appears on top of the other objects in the group.

9. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of the <Group> object to show the contents. Drag the top <Path> object to just below the bottom <Path> object in the group. When a line appears, release the mouse button. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of the <Group> object to hide the contents of the group.
This changes the stacking order of the artwork in your project and is the same as choosing Object > Arrange > Send To Back.


 Tip
If you want to merge layers or groups, you could also select the layers or content to merge in the Layers panel, and then choose Merge Selected from the Layers panel menu (). In the case of the two groups you selected, it simply creates a single group that contains the artwork from the original two groups. If you were to merge selected sublayers, a single sublayer would be created.

10. Click the top <Group> object to select it in the "Shirt Front" layer. Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) the other <Group> beneath it in the layer to select both (see the figure for what to select). Drag the selected <Group> objects onto the "Front Collar" sublayer to move them.

11. Choose File > Save.

 Note
You cannot merge selected content that is not either a layer, sublayer, or group. For instance, if you were to select a <Path> object and a sublayer or group in the Layers panel, the Merge Selected command would be available, but it wouldn't work.


Pasting layers
To complete the shirts, you'll copy and paste the remaining pieces of artwork from another file. You can paste a layered file into another file and even keep the layers intact. In this section, you'll also learn a few new things, including how to apply appearance attributes to layers and reordering layers.

1. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.
2. Choose File > Open, and open the Pattern.ai file, located in the Lesson08 folder in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.
3. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the panel. To see how the objects in each layer are organized, Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the eye icon () for each layer in the Layers panel to show one layer and hide the others. You can also click the disclosure triangles () to the left of each layer name to expand and collapse the layers for further inspection. When you're finished, make sure that all the layers are showing and that they are collapsed.

4. Choose Select > All, and then choose Edit > Copy to select and copy the content to the clipboard.
5. Choose File > Close to close the Pattern.ai file without saving any changes. If a warning dialog box appears, click No (Windows) or Don't Save (Mac OS).
6. In the Shirts.ai file, choose Paste Remembers Layers from the Layers panel menu (). A check mark next to the option indicates that it's selected.
When Paste Remembers Layers is selected, artwork is pasted into the layer(s) from which it was copied, regardless of which layer is active in the Layers panel. If the option is not selected, all objects are pasted into the active layer and the layers from the original file are not pasted in.

 Note
If the target document has a layer of the same name, Illustrator combines the pasted content into a layer of the same name.

7. Choose Edit > Paste, to paste the pattern content into the center of the artboard.

The Paste Remembers Layers option causes the Pattern.ai layers to be pasted as three separate layers at the top of the Layers panel (print3, print2, print1).
Now you'll move the newly pasted layers into the "Pattern Front" layer, and then change the ordering of the layers.
8. Drag the bottom of the Layers panel down so that you can see the new layers and the "Pattern Front" layer.
9. In the Layers panel, select the print3 layer (if it's not already selected) and Shift-click the print1 layer name. Drag any of the three selected layers down on top of the "Pattern Front" layer to move it to the new layer.
The three pasted layers become sublayers of the "Pattern Front" layer. Notice that they keep their individual layer colors.

10. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Changing layer order
As you've seen, you can easily drag layers, sublayers, groups, and other content in the Layers panel to reorganize the layer ordering. There are also several Layers panel options for commands like reversing layer ordering and more.

1. Click the print3 layer and Shift-click the print1 layer names to select all three layers again.
2. Choose Reverse Order from the Layers panel menu () to reverse the layer ordering.

3. Choose Select > Deselect (if available), and then click the disclosure triangle for the "Pattern Front" and "Shirt Front" layers, if need be, to hide their contents.

Viewing layers
The Layers panel lets you hide layers, sublayers, or individual objects from view. When a layer is hidden, the content on the layer is also locked and cannot be selected or printed. You can also use the Layers panel to display layers or objects individually, in either Preview or Outline mode.

