

Working with effects
Effects alter the appearance of an object without changing the base object. Next, you will apply the Drop Shadow effect to the world artwork.


 Note
Learn more about effects in Lesson 11, "Exploring Creative Uses of Effects and Graphic Styles."

1. With the Selection tool (), click the blue circle.

2. Choose Effect > Stylize > Drop Shadow. In the Drop Shadow dialog box, set the following options (if necessary):
• Mode: Multiply (the default setting)
• Opacity: 75% (the default setting)
• X Offset and Y Offset: 0.1 in (the default setting)
• Blur: 0.07 in (the default setting)
3. Select Preview, and then click OK.
4. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.








1. Getting to Know the Work Area

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll explore the workspace and learn how to do the following:
• Open an Adobe Illustrator CC file.
• Adjust the user interface brightness.
• Work with the Tools panel.
• Work with panels.
• Reset and save your workspace.
• Use viewing options to change the display magnification.
• Navigate multiple artboards and documents.
• Explore document groups.
• Find resources for using Illustrator.

This lesson takes approximately 45 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



To make the best use of the extensive drawing, painting, and editing capabilities of Adobe Illustrator CC, it's important to learn how to navigate the workspace. The workspace consists of the Application bar, menus, Tools panel, Control panel, Document window, and the default set of panels.


Introducing Adobe Illustrator
In Illustrator, you primarily create and work with vector graphics (sometimes called vector shapes or vector objects). Vector graphics are made up of lines and curves defined by mathematical objects called vectors. You can freely move or modify vector graphics without losing detail or clarity because they are resolution-independent. In other words, vector graphics maintain crisp edges when resized, printed to a PostScript printer, saved in a PDF file, or imported into a vector-based graphics application. As a result, vector graphics are the best choice for artwork, such as logos, that will be used at various sizes and in various output media.


 Tip
To learn more about bitmap graphics, search for "Importing bitmap images" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

Illustrator also allows you to incorporate bitmap images—technically called raster images—that use a rectangular grid of picture elements (pixels) to represent the visual. Each pixel is assigned a specific location and color value. Raster images can be created in a program like Adobe Photoshop.


Starting Illustrator and opening a file
You'll be working with multiple art files during this lesson, but before you begin, you'll restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator CC. Resetting the preferences is not something that you'll need to do when working on your own projects, but it ensures that what you see onscreen matches the descriptions in the lessons.


 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of the book.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.
2. Double-click the Adobe Illustrator CC icon to start Adobe Illustrator.
3. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials to ensure that the workspace is set to the default settings.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the Workspace menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

4. Choose File > Open, to open the L1_start1.ai file. In the Lesson01 folder in the Lessons folder on your hard disk, select the L1_start1.ai file and click Open.
This lesson contains a fictitious business name, address, and website address made up for the purposes of the project.

 Note
On Windows, going forward, if you see a message about compatible GPU, click OK.

5. Click Disable Sync Settings if the sync dialog box appears.

 Note
For more information on syncing with Adobe Creative Cloud, see the sidebar "Syncing with the Adobe Creative Cloud" at the end of this lesson.

6. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
This fits the active artboard into the Document window so that you can see the entire artboard. As you'll soon learn, an artboard is the area that contains your printable artwork and is similar to a page in Adobe InDesign.
7. Click the word "Libraries" in the panel tab on the right to collapse it, if the Libraries panel is showing (see the following figure).

 Note
As of the writing of this book, the Libraries panel appears in the default workspace.


When the file is open and Illustrator is fully launched, the Application bar, menus, Tools panel, Control panel, and panel groups appear on the screen. Docked on the right side of the screen, you will see that default panels appear as icons. Illustrator also consolidates many of your most frequently accessed options in the Control panel below the menu bar. This lets you work with fewer visible panels and gives you a larger area in which to work.
You will use the L1_start1.ai file to practice navigating, zooming, and investigating an Illustrator document and the workspace.
8. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, name the file businesscard.ai and save it in the Lesson01 folder. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows). Click Save. If a warning dialog box appears referencing spot colors and transparency, click Continue. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the options at their default settings and click OK.

The Illustrator Options dialog box contains options that can control how the file is saved, allow you to save to a previous version of Illustrator, and more.

Understanding the workspace
You create and manipulate your documents and files using various elements, such as panels, bars, and windows. Any arrangement of these elements is called a workspace. When you first start Illustrator, you see the default workspace, which you can customize for the tasks you perform. You can create and save multiple workspaces—one for editing and another for viewing, for example—and switch among them as you work.


 Note
The figures in this lesson are taken using the Windows operating system and may look slightly different from what you see, especially if you are using the Mac OS.

Below, the areas of the default workspace are described:


 Note
The GPU Performance icon () currently only shows on Windows. The GPU Performance feature introduces a preview mode (GPU Preview) which enables rendering of Illustrator artwork on the graphics processor (Windows only).

A. The Application bar across the top contains a workspace switcher, a menu bar (Windows only, depending on screen resolution), and application controls.

 Note
For the Mac OS, the menu items appear above the Application bar (see below).


B. The Control panel displays options for the currently selected object.
C. Panels help you monitor and modify your work. Certain panels are displayed by default, and you can display any panel by choosing it from the Window menu. Many panels have menus with panel-specific options. Panels can be grouped, stacked, docked, or free-floating.
D. The Tools panel contains tools for creating and editing images, artwork, page elements, and more. Related tools are grouped together.
E. The Document window displays the file you're working on.
F. The Status bar appears at the lower-left edge of the Document window. It displays information, zooming, and navigation controls.

Adjusting the user-interface brightness
Similar to Adobe InDesign or Adobe Photoshop, Illustrator supports a brightness adjustment for the application user interface. This is a program preference setting that allows you to choose a brightness setting from four preset levels or to specify a custom value.

In this section, you will change the setting to see its effect, and then you will change it back to the program default.
1. Choose Illustrator > Preferences > User Interface (Mac OS) or Edit > Preferences > User Interface (Windows).
2. Choose Light from the Brightness menu of the User Interface options.
Notice that the interface has become lighter overall. This can be useful if the default interface is too dark, for instance.


 Note
On Mac OS, you won't see some of the options you see in the figure (Windows), and that's okay.

3. Drag the Brightness slider to the left until you see a value of 50%.
You can drag the Brightness slider beneath the Brightness menu to the left or to the right to adjust the overall brightness using a custom value.
4. Choose Medium Dark from the Brightness menu.
5. Select White for the Canvas Color option beneath the Brightness slider.
The canvas is the area outside of the artboards in your document.
6. Click Cancel so you don't save the preference settings.
If you decide to change the interface brightness, what you see may differ in appearance from the figures in this book. We left the brightness at the default.

Working with the Tools panel
The Tools panel contains selection tools, drawing and painting tools, editing tools, viewing tools, the Fill and Stroke boxes, drawing modes, and screen modes. As you work through the lessons, you'll learn about the specific function of each tool.


 Note
The Tools panel shown here and throughout this lesson has two columns. You may see a one-column Tools panel, depending on your screen resolution and workspace.


1. Position the pointer over the Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Notice that the name (Selection tool) and keyboard shortcut (V) are displayed.


 Tip
You can modify the default keyboard shortcuts that Illustrator comes with. To do this, choose Edit > Keyboard Shortcuts. For more information, see "Keyboard Shortcuts," in Illustrator Help.


 Tip
You can turn the tool tips on or off by choosing Illustrator > Preferences > General (Mac OS) or Edit > Preferences > General (Windows) and deselecting Show Tool Tips.

2. Position the pointer over the Direct Selection tool (), and click and hold down the mouse button. You'll see additional selection tools appear in a menu. Click the Group Selection tool to select it.
Any tool in the Tools panel that displays a small triangle contains additional tools that can be selected in this way.


 Tip
You can also select hidden tools by pressing the Option key (Mac OS) or Alt key (Windows) and clicking the tool in the Tools panel. Each click selects the next hidden tool in the hidden tool sequence.

3. Click and hold down the mouse button on the Rectangle tool () to reveal more tools. Click the arrow at the right edge of the hidden tools panel to separate the tools from the Tools panel so that you can access them at all times.

4. Click the Close button (X) in the upper-left corner (Mac OS) or upper-right corner (Windows) on the floating tool panel's title bar to close it. The tools return to the Tools panel.


 Tip
You can also collapse the floating tool panels or dock them to the workspace or each other.

Next, you'll learn how to resize and float the Tools panel. In the figures in this lesson, the Tools panel is a double column by default. You may see a single-column Tools panel to start with, depending on your screen resolution and workspace, and that's okay.
5. Click the double arrow in the upper-left corner of the Tools panel to either expand the one column into two columns or collapse the two columns into one (depending on your screen resolution). Click the double arrow again to expand or collapse the Tools panel.

6. Click the dark-gray title bar at the top of the Tools panel or the dashed line beneath the title bar, and drag the panel into the workspace. The Tools panel is now floating in the workspace.


 Tip
You can click the double arrow at the top of the Tools panel or double-click the title bar at the top of the Tools panel to switch between two columns and one column. Just be careful not to click the X.

7. To dock the Tools panel again, drag its title bar or the dashed line below it to the left side of the screen (Mac OS) or Application window (Windows). When the pointer reaches the left edge, a translucent blue border, called the drop zone, appears. Release the mouse button to dock the Tools panel neatly into the side of the workspace.


Custom Tools panels
You may find yourself using a specific set of tools most of the time. In Illustrator, you can create custom tools panels that contain the tools you use most often.
By choosing Window > Tools > New Tools Panel, you can create a custom tools panel. They are saved with Illustrator and can be closed and opened, regardless of which document is open. They are free-floating, and can also be docked and saved in a custom workspace you create. Each new custom tools panel has stroke and fill controls at the bottom, and a plus sign (+) where you can drag copies of tools from the main Tools panel onto the custom panel you are creating.

Note: Dragging tools from the default Tools panel copies them to the custom tools panel, rather than moves them.


Exploring the Control panel
The Control panel is the panel that's docked at the top of the workspace, just above the docked Tools panel. It offers quick access to options, commands, and other panels relevant to the currently selected content. You can click text like "Stroke" or "Opacity" to display a related panel. For example, clicking the word "Stroke" will display the Stroke panel.

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and click the letter "f" in the word "fiber" in the artwork on the artboard.
Notice that options for that object appear in the Control panel, including the word "Group," color options, Stroke, and more.

2. With any tool, drag the gripper bar (the dashed line along the left edge) of the Control panel into the workspace.
Once the Control panel is free-floating, you can drag the dark-gray gripper bar that appears on the left edge of the Control panel to move it to the top or bottom of the workspace.


 Tip
You can also dock the Control panel by choosing Dock To Top or Dock To Bottom from the Control panel menu () on the right side of the Control panel.


 Tip
The Control panel can be dragged by the dark-gray gripper bar on the left edge to the bottom of the screen (Mac OS) or Application window (Windows). When the pointer (not the panel) reaches the bottom of the screen (Mac OS) or Application window (Windows), a blue line appears, indicating the drop zone in which it will be docked. You can then release the mouse button to dock it.

3. Drag the Control panel by the gripper bar on the left edge of the panel. When the pointer reaches the bottom of the Application bar, to the right of the Tools panel, a blue line appears indicating the drop zone. When you release the mouse button, the panel is docked.

4. Choose Select > Deselect so that the content on the artboard is no longer selected.

Working with panels
Panels, which are listed alphabetically in the Window menu, give you quick access to many tools that make modifying artwork easier. By default, some panels are docked and appear as icons on the right side of the workspace.

Next, you'll experiment with hiding, closing, and opening panels.
1. First, choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher in the upper-right corner of the Application bar to reset the panels to their original location.


 Tip
You can also choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials to reset the panels.

2. Click the Swatches panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to expand the panel, or choose Window > Swatches.
Notice that the Swatches panel appears with two other panels—the Brushes panel and the Symbols panel. They are all part of the same panel group.
3. Click the Symbols panel tab to view the Symbols panel.

4. Now click the Color panel icon () in the dock. Notice that a new panel group appears and that the panel group that contained the Swatches panel collapses.

5. Click and drag the gripper bar at the bottom of the Color panel down to resize the panel, showing more of the color spectrum.

 Note
The Color panel you see may look different and that's okay.

6. Click the Color panel icon to collapse the panel group.

 Tip
To collapse a panel back to an icon, you can click its tab, its icon, or the double arrow in the panel title bar.


 Tip
To find a hidden panel, choose the panel name from the Window menu. A check mark to the left of the panel name indicates that the panel is already open and in front of other panels in its panel group. If you choose a panel name that is already selected in the Window menu, the panel and its group collapse.

7. Click the double arrow at the top of the dock to expand the panels. Click the double arrow again to collapse the panels. Use this method to show more than one panel group at a time. Your panels may look different when expanded, and that's okay.


 Tip
To expand or collapse the panel dock, you can also double-click the panel dock title bar at the top.

8. To increase the width of all the panels in the dock, drag the left edge of the docked panels to the left until text appears. To decrease the width, click and drag the left edge of the docked panels to the right until the text disappears.

9. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials to reset the workspace.
10. Drag the Swatches panel icon () away from the dock to remove the panel from the dock and make it a free-floating panel. Notice that the panel stays collapsed as an icon when it is free-floating.
11. Click the double arrow in the Swatches panel title bar to expand the panel so you can see its contents.

You can also move panels from one panel group to another. In this way, you can create custom panel groups that contain the panels you use most often.

 Tip
To close a panel, drag the panel away from the dock and click the X in the panel title bar. You can also right-click a docked panel tab or panel icon and choose Close from the menu.

12. Drag the Swatches panel by the panel tab, the panel title bar, or the area behind the panel tab onto the Brushes () and Symbols () panel icons. Release the mouse button when you see a blue line between the panel icons and an outline around the Brushes panel group.

Next, you'll organize the panels to create more room in your workspace.
13. Choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher in the Application bar to make sure that the panels are reset to their default state.

 Tip
Press Tab to hide all panels. Press Tab again to show them all again. You can hide or show all panels except for the Tools and Control panels by pressing Shift+Tab to toggle between hide and show.

14. Click the double arrow at the top of the dock to expand the panels.
15. Click the Color Guide panel tab to make sure it's selected. Double-click the panel tab to reduce the size of the panel. Double-click the tab again to minimize the panel. This can also be done when a panel is free-floating (not docked).


 Note
Many panels only require that you double-click the panel tab twice to return to the full-size view of the panel. If you double-click one more time, the panel fully expands.


 Tip
To reduce and expand the panel size, instead of double-clicking the panel tab, you can click the small arrow icon to the left of the panel name in the panel tab, if present.


Editing panel groups
Panel groups can be docked, undocked, and arranged in either collapsed or expanded modes. Next, you will resize and reorganize panel groups, which can make it easier to see more important panels.

1. Click the Symbols panel tab if not already selected. Drag the dividing line between the Symbols panel group and the Stroke panel group below it, up to resize the group.


 Note
You may not be able to drag the divider very far, depending on your screen size, screen resolution, and number of panels expanded.


 Note
If you drag a group into the dock and drop it into an existing group, the two groups merge. Reset the workspace and open the panel group to try again.

2. Choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher on the far right side of the Application bar above the Control panel.
3. Choose Window > Align to open the Align panel group. Drag the title bar of the Align panel group (the bar above the tabs) to the docked panels on the right side of the workspace. Position the pointer below the group that the Symbols panel icon () is in until a single blue line appears below the group. Release the mouse button to create a new group in the dock.

Next, you will drag a panel from one group to another in the docked panels.

 Tip
You can also reorder entire panel groups in the dock by dragging the double gray line at the top of each panel group up or down.

4. Drag the Transform panel icon () up so that the pointer is just below the Color panel icon (). A blue line appears between the Color panel icon and the Color Guide panel icon (), outlining the Color panel group in blue. Release the mouse button.
Arranging the panels in groups can help you work faster.


Resetting and saving your workspace
You can reset your Tools panel and other panels to their default positions, which you've been doing throughout this lesson. You can also save the position of panels so that you can easily access them at any time by creating a workspace. Next, you will create a workspace to access a group of commonly used panels.


 Tip
Docking panels next to each other on the right side of the workspace is a great way to conserve space. A docked panel can also be collapsed and resized to conserve even more space.

1. Choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher in the Application bar.
2. Click the Libraries panel tab to hide the panel group, if necessary.
3. Choose Window > Pathfinder to open the Pathfinder panel group. Click and drag the Pathfinder panel tab to the right side of the workspace. When the pointer approaches the left edge of the docked panels, a blue line appears. Release the mouse button to dock the panel.

4. Click the Close button (X) in the upper-left corner (Mac OS) or upper-right corner (Windows) to close the remaining panel group, which contains the Align and Transform panels.

 Note
To delete saved workspaces, choose Window > Workspace > Manage Workspaces. Select the workspace name, and click the Delete Workspace button.

5. Choose Window > Workspace > New Workspace. Change the Name to Navigation in the New Workspace dialog box, and click OK (the name could be anything). The workspace named Navigation is now saved with Illustrator until you remove it.

6. Choose Window > Workspace > Essentials, and then choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials. Notice that the panels return to their default positions. Choose Window > Workspace > Navigation. Toggle between the two workspaces using the Window > Workspace command, and return to the Essentials workspace before starting the next exercise.

 Tip
To change a saved workspace, reset the panels as you'd like them to appear, and then choose Window > Workspace > New Workspace. In the New Workspace dialog box, name the workspace with the original name. A message appears in the dialog box warning that you will overwrite an existing workspace with the same name if you go ahead and click OK.


Using panel menus
Most panels have more options that are available in a panel menu. Clicking the panel menu icon () in the upper-right corner gives you access to additional options for the selected panel, including changing the panel display in some cases.

Next, you will change the display of the Symbols panel using its panel menu.
1. Click the Symbols panel icon () on the right side of the workspace. You can also choose Window > Symbols to display this panel.
2. Click the panel menu icon () in the upper-right corner of the Symbols panel.

3. Choose Small List View from the panel menu.
This displays the symbol names, together with thumbnails. Because the options in the panel menu apply only to the active panel, only the Symbols panel view is affected.
4. Click the Symbols panel menu icon () and choose Thumbnail View to return the symbols to their original view. Click the Symbols panel tab to hide the panel again.
In addition to the panel menus, context-sensitive menus display commands relevant to the active tool, selection, or panel. Usually the commands in a context menu are available in another part of the workspace, but using a context menu can save you time.
5. Position the pointer over the Document window or the contents of a panel. Then, right-click to show a context menu with specific options.

The context-sensitive menu shown here is displayed when you right-click the artboard with nothing selected.

 Note
If you position the pointer over the tab or title bar for a panel, and right-click, you can close a panel or a panel group in the context menu that appears.


Changing the view of artwork
When working in files, it's likely that you'll need to change the magnification level and navigate among artboards. The magnification level, which can range from 3.13% to 6400%, is displayed in the title bar (or document tab) next to the file name and in the lower-left corner of the Document window. Using any of the viewing tools and commands affects only the display of the artwork, not the actual size of the artwork.


Using view commands
To enlarge or reduce the view of artwork using the View menu, do one of the following:

• Choose View > Zoom In to enlarge the display of the businesscard.ai artwork.
• Choose View > Zoom Out to reduce the view of the businesscard.ai artwork.

 Tip
You can also zoom in using the keyboard shortcut Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows). That's Command and + (Mac OS) or Ctrl and + (Windows). You can also zoom out using the keyboard shortcut Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows). That's Command and - (Mac OS) or Ctrl and - (Windows).

Each time you choose a Zoom option, the view of the artwork is resized to the closest preset zoom level. The preset zoom levels appear in a menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window, identified by a down arrow next to a percentage.
You can also use the View menu to fit the artwork for the active artboard to your screen to fit all artboards into the view area, or to view artwork at actual size.

 Tip
You can also double-click the Hand tool () in the Tools panel to fit the active artboard in the Document window.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

 Note
Because the canvas (the area outside the artboards) extends to 227", you can easily lose sight of your illustration. By choosing View > Fit Artboard In Window or by using the keyboard shortcuts Command+0 (Mac OS) or Ctrl+0 (Windows), artwork is centered in the viewing area.

2. Choose View > Actual Size to display the artwork at actual size.
The artwork is displayed at 100%. The actual size of your artwork determines how much of it can be viewed onscreen at 100%.

 Tip
You can also double-click the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel to display artwork at 100%.

3. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window before continuing to the next section.

Using the Zoom tool
In addition to the View menu options, you can use the Zoom tool () to magnify and reduce the view of artwork to predefined magnification levels.

1. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and then move the pointer into the Document window.
Notice that a plus sign (+) appears at the center of the Zoom tool pointer.
2. Position the Zoom tool over the text "Jane Mitchell," and click once. The artwork is displayed at a higher magnification.
Notice that where you clicked is now in the center of the Document window.

3. Click two more times on the "Jane Mitchell" text. The view is increased again, and you'll notice that the area you clicked is magnified.

 Note
The percent of the magnification is determined by the size of the marquee you draw with the Zoom tool ()—the smaller the marquee, the higher the level of magnification.

4. With the Zoom tool still selected, position the pointer over the text "Jane Mitchell" and hold down the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key. A minus sign (-) appears at the center of the Zoom tool pointer. With the Option or Alt key pressed, click the artwork twice to reduce the view of the artwork.
For a more controlled zoom, you can drag a marquee around a specific area of your artwork. This magnifies only the selected area.
5. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
6. With the Zoom tool still selected, click and drag a marquee around the fiber logo in the upper-left corner of the artboard. When you see the marquee around the area you are dragging, release the mouse button. The marqueed area is now enlarged to fit the size of the Document window (as best it can).

7. Double-click the Hand tool () in the Tools panel to fit the artboard in the Document window.
The Zoom tool is used frequently during the editing process to enlarge and reduce the view of artwork. Because of this, Illustrator allows you to select it using the keyboard at any time without first deselecting any other tool you may be using.
8. Select any other tool in the Tools panel, and move the pointer into the Document window.

 Note
In certain versions of Mac OS, the keyboard shortcuts for the Zoom tool () open Spotlight or Finder. If you decide to use these shortcuts in Illustrator, you may want to turn off or change those keyboard shortcuts in the Mac OS System Preferences.

9. Press Command+spacebar (Mac OS) or Ctrl+spacebar (Windows) to use the Zoom tool. Click or drag to zoom in on any area of the artwork, and then release the keys.
10. To zoom out using the keyboard, hold down Command+Option+spacebar (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Alt+spacebar (Windows). Click the desired area to reduce the view of the artwork, and then release the keys.
11. Double-click the Hand tool in the Tools panel to fit the artboard in the Document window.

Touch workspace
In Adobe Illustrator CC (2014 release), the Touch workspace is designed for Windows 8 tablets. The Touch workspace surfaces the essential tools and controls for drawing and editing with a pressure sensitive pen and multi-touch gestures.
You can create logos, icons, explore custom lettering and typography, create UI wireframes, and more. The Touch workspace brings traditional drawing templates, French curves, to the Illustrator workspace. These shapes project a scalable, movable outline that can be traced against to quickly create refined curves.
At any time (on a supported device), you can immediately switch between the Touch and traditional workspaces to access the full range of Illustrator tools and controls. For more information on working with touch devices and Illustrator visit Help (Help > Illustrator Help).
On touch devices (a Direct touch device [a touchscreen device], or an Indirect touch device [the Trackpad on a Mac computer], touchpads, or the Wacom Intuos5 device), you can also use standard touch gestures (pinch and swipe) for:
• Pinch in or out, using two fingers (like the thumb and forefinger) to zoom.
• Place two fingers on the document, and move the fingers together to pan within the document.
• Swipe or flick to navigate artboards.
• In artboard editing mode, use two fingers to rotate the artboard by 90°.


Scrolling through a document
You can use the Hand tool () to pan to different areas of a document. Using the Hand tool allows you to push the document around much like you would a piece of paper on your desk.


 Note
The spacebar shortcut for the Hand tool () does not work when the Type tool () is active and the cursor is in text. To access the Hand tool when the cursor is in text, press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key.

1. With the Hand tool () selected in the Tools panel, drag down in the Document window. As you drag, the artwork moves with the hand.
As with the Zoom tool (), you can select the Hand tool with a keyboard shortcut without first deselecting the active tool.
2. Click any other tool except the Type tool () in the Tools panel, and move the pointer into the Document window.
3. Hold down the spacebar on the keyboard to temporarily select the Hand tool, and then drag to bring the artwork back into the center of your view.
4. Double-click the Hand tool to fit the active artboard in the Document window.

Viewing artwork
To save time when working with large or complex documents, you can create your own custom views within a document so that you can quickly jump to specific areas and zoom levels. Set up the view that you want to save, and then choose View > New View. Name the view, and click OK. The view is saved with the document.

1. Choose View > Email (at the very bottom of the View menu), to zoom in to a saved zoom view of the image. This custom view was saved with the document by the author.
2. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

 Note
Depending on the resolution of your screen, the bottom of the View menu and the menu options may be cut off. You may need to click the black arrow at the bottom of the View menu several times to see more options.

When you open a file, it is automatically displayed in Preview mode, which shows how the artwork will print. When you're working with large or complex illustrations, you may want to view only the outlines, or wireframes, of objects in your artwork so that the screen doesn't have to redraw the artwork each time you make a change. This is called Outline mode. Outline mode can be helpful when selecting objects, as you will see in Lesson 2, "Techniques for Selecting Artwork."
3. Choose View > Outline.
Only the outlines of the objects are displayed. Use this view to find objects that might not be visible in Preview mode.
4. Choose View > Preview to see all the attributes of the artwork.

 Tip
Press Command+Y (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Y (Windows) to toggle between Preview and Outline modes.

5. Choose View > Overprint Preview to view any lines or shapes that are set to overprint.
This view is helpful for those in the print industry who need to see how inks interact when set to overprint. You may not actually see much of a change in the content when you change to this mode.

 Note
When switching between viewing modes, visual changes may not be readily apparent. Zooming in and out (View > Zoom In and View > Zoom Out) may help you see the differences more easily.

6. Choose View > Pixel Preview to see how the artwork will look when it is rasterized and viewed onscreen in a Web browser. Choose View > Pixel Preview to deselect pixel preview.

7. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window to view the entire active artboard.

Navigating multiple artboards
Illustrator allows for multiple artboards within a single file. This is a great way to create a document so that you can have collateral pieces, like a brochure, a postcard, and a business card, in the same document. You can easily share content among designs, create multi-page PDFs, and print multiple pages by creating more than one artboard. For more information on artboards, check out the sidebar titled "Artboard overview" at the end of this section.

Multiple artboards can be added when you initially create an Illustrator document by choosing File > New. You can also add or remove artboards after the document is created by using the Artboard tool in the Tools panel.
Next, you will learn how to efficiently navigate a document that contains multiple artboards.
1. Choose File > Open and, in the Lesson01 folder, select the L1_start2.ai file located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk. Click Open to open the file.
2. Choose View > Fit All In Window to fit all artboards in the Document window. Notice that there are two artboards in the document.
The artboards in a document can be arranged in any order, orientation, or artboard size—they can even overlap. Suppose that you want to create a four-page brochure. You can create different artboards for every page of the brochure, all with the same size and orientation. They can be arranged horizontally or vertically or in whatever way you like.

The L1_start2.ai document has two artboards that contain the designs for the front of a postcard and a business flyer.
3. Press Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows) until you can see the logo in the upper-left corner of the canvas, which is outside the artboards.
4. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
This command fits the currently active artboard in the window. The active artboard is identified in the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.

 Note
Learn how to work more with artboards in Lesson 4, "Transforming Artwork."

5. Choose 2 Artboard 2 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner. The postcard appears in the Document window.

6. Choose View > Zoom Out. Notice that zooming occurs on the currently active artboard.
Notice the arrows to the right and left of the Artboard Navigation menu. You can use these to navigate to the first (), previous (), next (), and last () artboards.
7. Click the Previous navigation button () to view the previous artboard (Artboard 1) in the Document window.

8. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window to make sure that the first artboard (Artboard 1) fits in the Document window.
Another method for navigating multiple artboards is to use the Artboards panel. Next, you will open the Artboards panel and navigate the document.
9. Choose Window > Artboards to expand the Artboards panel on the right side of the workspace.
The Artboards panel lists all artboards in the document. This panel allows you to navigate between artboards, rename artboards, add or delete artboards, edit artboard settings, and more.
Next, you will focus on navigating the document using this panel.

 Note
Double-clicking the artboard name in the Artboards panel allows you to change the name of the artboard. Clicking the artboard icon () or () to the right of the artboard name in the panel allows you to edit artboard options.

10. Double-click the number 2 in the Artboards panel. This fits Artboard 2 in the Document window.

11. Double-click the number 1 to the left of Artboard 1 in the Artboards panel to show the first artboard in the Document window.
Notice that when you double-click to navigate to an artboard, that artboard fits in the Document window.
12. Click the Artboards panel icon () in the dock to collapse the Artboards panel.

Artboard overview
Artboards represent the regions that can contain printable artwork (similar to pages in a program like Adobe InDesign). You can use artboards to crop areas for printing or placement purposes. Multiple artboards are useful for creating a variety of things, such as multiple-page PDFs, printed pages with different sizes or different elements, independent elements for websites, video storyboards, or individual items for animation in Adobe Flash® or Adobe After Effects.
A. Printable area is bounded by the innermost dotted lines and represents the portion of the page on which the selected printer can print.
B. Nonprintable area is between the two sets of dotted lines representing any nonprintable margin of the page. This example shows the nonprintable area of an 8.5" x 11" page for a printer that cannot print to the edge of the page.
C. Artboard is bounded by solid lines and represents the entire region that can contain printable artwork.
D. Bleed area is the amount of artwork that falls outside of the printing bounding box, or outside the crop area and trim marks.
E. Canvas is the area outside the artboard that extends to the edge of the 227" square window. Objects placed on the canvas are visible on-screen, but they do not print.

—From Illustrator Help


 Note
You can have up to 100 artboards per Illustrator document, depending on the size of the artboards. You can specify the number of artboards for a document when you create it, and you can add and remove artboards at any time while working in a document. You can create artboards of different sizes, resize them with the Artboard tool, and position them on the screen—they can even overlap each other.


Using the Navigator panel
The Navigator panel is another way to navigate a document with a single artboard or multiple artboards. This is useful when you need to see all artboards in the document in one window and to edit content in any of those artboards in a zoomed-in view.

1. Choose Window > Navigator to open the Navigator panel. It is in a free-floating group of two panels in the workspace.
2. In the Navigator panel, type 50% in the Zoom box in the lower-left corner of the panel and press Enter or Return to decrease the level of magnification.

 Note
You can also drag the slider in the Navigator panel to change the view of your artwork. Pause for a moment after dragging to allow the panel to catch up.


The red box in the Navigator panel, called the proxy view area, becomes larger, indicating the area of the document that is being shown. Depending on the zoom percentage, you may or may not see the proxy view area yet, but you will in the next few steps.

 Note
The percentage and proxy view area in your Navigator panel may appear differently in this section. That's okay.

3. Click the larger mountain icon () in the lower-right corner of the Navigator panel several times to zoom in to the brochure until the percentage in the Navigator panel shows approximately 150%.
4. Position the pointer inside the proxy view area of the Navigator panel. When the pointer becomes a hand (), drag to pan to different parts of the artwork. Try dragging the proxy view area over the postcard in the Navigator panel preview.

5. In the Navigator panel preview area at the top of the panel, move the pointer outside of the proxy view area (red box) and click. This moves the box and displays a different area of the artwork in the Document window.
6. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

 Note
You may need to adjust the slider in the Navigator panel to see the logo in the proxy view area.

7. Click the Navigator panel menu icon () and deselect View Artboard Contents Only so that you see any artwork that is on the canvas, as well. Notice the logo on the canvas in the panel.

8. Close the Navigator panel group by clicking the Close button (X) in upper-left corner (Mac OS) or the upper-right corner (Windows).

Arranging multiple documents
When you open more than one Illustrator file, the Document windows are tabbed. You can arrange the open documents in other ways, such as side by side, so that you can easily compare or drag items from one document to another. You can also use the Arrange Documents window to quickly display your open documents in a variety of configurations.

You should currently have two Illustrator files open: businesscard.ai and L1_start2.ai. Each file has its own tab at the top of the Document window. These documents are considered a group of Document windows. You can create document groups to loosely associate files while they are open.
1. Click the businesscard.ai document tab to show businesscard.ai in the Document window.

 Note
Be careful to drag directly to the right. Otherwise, you could undock the Document window and create a new group. If that happens, choose Window > Arrange > Consolidate All Windows.

2. Click and drag the businesscard.ai document tab to the right of the L1_start2.ai document tab.

Dragging the document tabs allows you to change the order of the documents. This can be very useful if you use the document shortcuts to navigate to the next or previous document.
These two documents are marketing pieces for the same company. To see both of them at one time, you can arrange the Document windows by cascading the windows or tiling them. Cascading allows you to cascade (stack) different document groups. Tiling shows multiple Document windows at one time, in various arrangements.
Next, you will tile the open documents so that you can see them both at one time.

 Tip
You can cycle between open documents by pressing Command+~ (next document), Command+Shift+~ (previous document) (Mac OS) or Ctrl+F6 (next document), Ctrl+Shift+F6 (previous document) (Windows).

3. Windows users skip to the next step. On the Mac OS, choose Window > Application Frame. Then, click the green button (green by default) in the upper-left corner of the Application window so that it fits as well as possible.

Mac OS users can use the Application frame to group all the workspace elements in a single, integrated window, similar to working in Windows. If you move or resize the Application frame, the elements respond to each other so that they don't overlap.

 Note
Your documents may be tiled in a different order. That's okay.

4. Choose Window > Arrange > Tile.
This shows both Document windows arranged in a pattern.
5. Click in each of the Document windows to activate the documents and choose View > Fit Artboard In Window for each of the documents. Also, make sure that Artboard 1 is showing for each document in the Document window.

With documents tiled, you can drag the dividing line between each of the Document windows to reveal more or less of a particular document. You can also drag objects between documents, which copies them from one document to another.
To change the arrangement of the tiled windows, it's possible to drag document tabs to new positions. However, it's easier to use the Arrange Documents window to quickly arrange open documents in a variety of configurations.

 Note
On the Mac OS, the menu bar is above the Application bar. Also, depending on the resolution of your screen, the Windows menus may appear in the Application bar.

6. Click the Arrange Documents button () in the Application bar to display the Arrange Documents window. Click the Consolidate All button () to bring the documents back together.

7. Click the Arrange Documents button () in the Application bar to display the Arrange Documents window again. Click the 2-Up vertical button () in the Arrange Documents window.
8. Click to select the businesscard.ai tab, if it is not already selected. Then, click the Close button (X) on the businesscard.ai document tab to close the document. If a dialog box appears asking you to save the document, click Don't Save (Mac OS) or No (Windows).

 Tip
You can also choose Window > Arrange > Consolidate All Windows to return the two documents to tabs in the same group.

9. Choose File > Close to close the L1_start2.ai document without saving.

Finding resources for using Illustrator
For complete and up-to-date information about using Illustrator panels, tools, and other application features, visit the Adobe website. By choosing Help > Illustrator Help, you'll be connected to the Illustrator Help website, where you can search Illustrator Help and support documents, as well as other websites relevant to Illustrator users. Community Help brings together active Adobe product users, Adobe product team members, authors, and experts to give you the most useful, relevant, and up-to-date information about Adobe products.

If you choose Help > Illustrator Help, you can also download a PDF of the Illustrator Help content by clicking the download link for your version.

Syncing with the Adobe Creative Cloud
The Sync Settings feature enables individual users to sync their preferences, presets, and libraries to the Adobe Creative Cloud. This means that if you use two computers, say, one at home and the other at work, the Sync Settings feature makes it easy for you to keep those settings synchronized across both computers. Also, if you have replaced your old computer with a new one and have reinstalled Illustrator, this friendly feature will let you bring back all those settings you took so much time to set up.

The syncing happens via your Adobe Creative Cloud account. All the settings are uploaded to your Creative Cloud account, and then are downloaded and applied on the other computer.
You need to initiate the sync manually; it does not happen automatically and it cannot be scheduled. For more information on syncing, see the "Sync settings using Adobe Creative Cloud" section in the Getting Started section of this book.


Review questions
1. Describe two ways to change the view of a document.

2. How do you select a tool in Illustrator?
3. Describe three ways to navigate among artboards in Illustrator.
4. How do you save panel locations and visibility preferences?
5. Describe how arranging Document windows can be helpful.

Review answers
1. You can choose commands from the View menu to zoom in or out of a document or to fit it to your screen; you can also use the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel and click or drag over a document to enlarge or reduce the view. In addition, you can use keyboard shortcuts to magnify or reduce the display of artwork. You can also use the Navigator panel to scroll artwork or to change its magnification without using the Document window.

2. To select a tool, you can either click the tool in the Tools panel or press the keyboard shortcut for that tool. For example, you can press V to select the Selection tool () from the keyboard. Selected tools remain active until you click a different tool.
3. To navigate among artboards in Illustrator, you can choose the artboard number from the Artboard Navigation menu at the lower-left of the Document window; you can use the Artboard Navigation arrows in the lower-left of the Document window to go to the first, previous, next, and last artboards; you can use the Artboards panel to navigate to an artboard; or you can use the Navigator panel to drag the proxy view area to navigate between artboards.
4. You can save panel locations and visibility preferences by choosing Window > Workspace > New Workspace to create custom work areas and to make it easier to find the controls that you need.
5. Arranging Document windows allows you to tile windows or to cascade document groups. This can be useful if you are working on multiple Illustrator files and you need to compare or share content among them.







2. Techniques for Selecting Artwork

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Differentiate between the various selection tools and use different selection techniques.
• Recognize Smart Guides.
• Save selections for future use.
• Use tools and commands to align shapes and points to each other and the artboard.
• Group and ungroup items.
• Work in Isolation mode.
• Arrange content.
• Select objects that are behind other objects.
• Hide and lock items for organizational purposes.

This lesson takes approximately 60 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



Selecting content in Adobe Illustrator is one of the more important things you'll do. In this lesson, you learn how to locate and select objects using the Selection tools; protect other objects by grouping, hiding, and locking them; align objects to each other and the artboard; and much more.


Getting started
When changing colors or size and adding effects or attributes, you must first select the object to which you are applying the changes. In this lesson, you will learn the fundamentals of using the selection tools. More advanced selection techniques using layers are discussed in Lesson 8, "Organizing Your Artwork with Layers."

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See "Getting Started" at the beginning of the book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.

3. Choose File > Open, and open the L2start.ai file in the Lesson02 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk. Choose View > Fit All In Window.

 Note
On Mac OS, you may need to choose Window > Arrange > Tile to maximize the size of the Document window after resetting the workspace.

4. Choose Window > Workspace > Essentials, make sure it's selected, and then choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials to reset the workspace.

Selecting objects
Whether you are creating artwork from scratch or editing existing artwork in Illustrator, you will need to become familiar with selecting objects. There are many methods and tools for doing this, and in this section, you'll explore the most widely used, which includes the Selection () and Direct Selection () tools.


Using the Selection tool
The Selection tool () in the Tools panel lets you select, move, and resize entire objects. In this first section, you'll become familiar with the tool.

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, if it's not already selected. Move the pointer over different shapes on the artboards, without clicking.
The icon that appears as you pass over objects () indicates that there is an object that can be selected under the pointer. When you hover over an object, that object is also outlined in a color like blue (in this instance).
2. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and drag a marquee around the two red circles on the artboard on the right to zoom in.
3. Select the Selection tool in the Tools panel, and then position the pointer over the black edge of the red circle on the left. A word such as "path" or "anchor" may appear, because Smart Guides are turned on by default.
Smart Guides are temporary snap-to guides that help you align, edit, and transform objects or artboards. You'll learn more about Smart Guides in Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."
4. Click anywhere in the red circle on the left to select it. A bounding box with eight handles appears.

The bounding box is used when making changes to objects, such as resizing or rotating them. The bounding box also indicates that an item is selected and ready to be modified, and the color of the bounding box indicates which layer the object is on. Layers are discussed more in Lesson 8.

 Note
To select an item without a fill, you can click the stroke (the edge), or drag a selection marquee across the object.

5. Using the Selection tool, click in the red circle on the right. Notice that the left red circle is now deselected and only the right circle is selected.
6. Hold down the Shift key, and click the left red circle to add it to the selection. Both red circles are now selected, and a larger bounding box surrounds them.

7. Reposition the circles anywhere in the document by clicking inside either selected circle (in the red area) and dragging. Because both circles are selected, they move together.
As you drag, you may notice the green lines that appear. These are called alignment guides and are visible because Smart Guides are turned on (View > Smart Guides). As you drag, the objects are aligned to other objects on the artboard. Also notice the measurement label (gray box) next to the pointer that shows the object's distance from its original position. Measurement labels also appear because Smart Guides are turned on.
8. Deselect the circles by clicking the artboard where there are no objects or by choosing Select > Deselect.
9. Revert to the last saved version of the document by choosing File > Revert. In the dialog box that appears, click Revert.

Using the Direct Selection tool
The Direct Selection () tool selects anchor points or path segments within an object so that it can be reshaped. Next, you will become familiar with selecting anchor points and path segments using the Direct Selection tool.

1. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
2. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and drag a marquee around the series of orange shapes below the red circles you selected previously to zoom in.

 Tip
You can also click in the middle of a shape to select it and to see the anchor points around its edge. This can be an easy way to see where the points are, and then you can click a point to select it.

3. Select the Direct Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Without clicking, position the pointer over the top edge of one of the orange shapes. Move the pointer along the top edge of the shape until the word "anchor" appears by the pointer.
When the Direct Selection tool is over an anchor point of a path or object, the word "anchor" appears. In Illustrator, as you draw, you create paths that are made up of anchor points and paths. Anchor points are used to control the shape of the path. The "anchor" label is showing because Smart Guides are turned on (View > Smart Guides). Also notice the little white box to the right of the pointer. The small dot that appears in the center of the white box indicates that the cursor is positioned over an anchor point.

4. Click to select that anchor point.
Notice that only the anchor point you selected is solid, indicating that it is selected, and the other anchor points in the shape are hollow, indicating that they are not selected. Also notice the small blue lines extending from the selected anchor point. These are called direction lines. At the end of the direction lines are direction points. The angle and length of the direction lines determine the shape and size of the curved segments. Moving the direction points can reshape the path.


 Note
The gray measurement label that appears as you drag the anchor point has the values dX and dY. dX indicates the distance that the pointer has moved along the x axis (horizontal), and dY indicates the distance that the pointer has moved along the y axis (vertical).

5. With the Direct Selection tool still selected, drag the selected anchor point up to edit the shape of the object.

6. Try clicking another point on the edge of the shape, and notice that the previous point is deselected.
7. Revert to the last saved version of the file by choosing File > Revert. In the Revert dialog box, click Revert.

Exploring selection and anchor point preferences
To display selection and anchor point preferences, choose Illustrator > Preferences > Selection & Anchor Display (Mac OS) or Edit > Preferences > Selection & Anchor Display (Windows). You can change the size of anchor points (called anchors in the dialog box) or the display of the direction lines (called handles in the dialog box).
As you move the pointer over anchor points in your artwork, they are highlighted. You can also turn off the highlighting of anchor points as the pointer hovers over them. Highlighting anchor points makes it easier to determine which point you are about to select. You will learn more about anchor points and anchor point handles in Lesson 5, "Creating an Illustration with the Drawing Tools."



Creating selections with a marquee
Another way to select content is by dragging a marquee around the objects that you want to select, which is what you'll do next.

1. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
2. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click three times, slowly, on the red circles.

 Tip
When dragging with the Selection tool (), you need to encompass only a small part of an object to select it.

3. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Position the pointer above and to the left of the leftmost red circle, and then drag downward and to the right to create a marquee that overlaps just the tops of the circles.

4. Choose Select > Deselect, or click where there are no objects.
Now you'll use the Direct Selection tool to select multiple anchor points in the red circles by dragging a marquee around anchor points.
5. Select the Direct Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Starting off the top, left of the leftmost red circle (see the figure), drag across the top edges of the two circles. Only the top anchor points become selected.


 Note
Selecting points using this method might take some practice. You'll need to drag across only the points you want selected; otherwise, more points will be selected. You can always click away from the objects to deselect them and then try again.

6. Click one of the selected anchor points, and drag to see how the anchor points reposition together.
You can use this method when selecting points so that you don't have to click exactly on the anchor point that you want to select.

7. Revert to the last saved version of the file by choosing File > Revert. In the dialog box that appears, click Revert.

Creating selections with the Magic Wand tool
You can use the Magic Wand tool () to select all objects in a document that have the same attributes, like a color fill. The fill is a color applied to the inside of an object. You can customize the Magic Wand tool to select objects based on options, like stroke weight, stroke color, and more, by double-clicking the Magic Wand tool in the Tools panel. You can also change the tolerances (range) used to identify similar objects.

1. Select the Selection tool () and click in a blank area of the smaller artboard on the right. This makes that artboard the active artboard.
2. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
3. Select the Magic Wand tool () in the Tools panel. Click one of the red circles on the right artboard, and notice that the other red circle becomes selected as well. No bounding box (a box surrounding the two shapes) appears, because the Magic Wand tool is still selected.

4. Holding down the Shift key, notice that the pointer has a plus sign (+) next to it. Click one of the orange shapes (below the red shapes) with the Magic Wand tool, and then release the key.

This adds all of the shapes filled with that same orange color to the selection.
5. With the Magic Wand tool still selected, hold down the Option (Mac OS) key or Alt (Windows) key and notice that a minus sign (-) appears next to the pointer. Click one of the orange shapes to deselect all of the shapes with that same fill, and then release the key. The red circles should still be selected.
6. Choose Select > Deselect, or click where there are no objects.

Selecting similar objects
You can also select objects based on similar fill color, stroke color, stroke weight, and more, using the Select Similar Objects button or the Select > Same command. The stroke of an object is the outline (border), and the stroke weight is the width of the stroke. Next, you will select several objects with the same fill and stroke applied.

1. Select the Selection tool () and click to select one of the red circles.
2. Click the arrow to the right of the Select Similar Objects button () in the Control panel to show a menu. Choose Fill Color to select all objects on any artboard with the same fill color (red) as the selected object.
Notice that the circles with the same red-colored fill are selected.

3. Click to select one of the orange shapes, and then choose Select > Same > Fill & Stroke.
All of the orange-filled shapes with the same stroke and fill and are now selected.
If you know that you may need to reselect a series of objects again, like the orange objects, you can save the selection you make so that you can easily recall it later. That's what you'll do next.


 Tip
It is helpful to name selections according to use or function. If you name the selection "1 pt stroke," for instance, the name may be misleading if you later change the stroke weight of the artwork.

4. With the orange shapes still selected, choose Select > Save Selection. Name the selection RobotMouth in the Save Selection dialog box, and click OK so that you'll be able to choose this selection at a later time.
5. Choose Select > Deselect.

Selecting in Outline mode
By default, Adobe Illustrator displays all artwork with their paint attributes, like fill and stroke, showing. However, you can choose to display artwork so that only its outlines (or paths) are visible. The next method for selecting involves viewing artwork in Outline mode and can be very useful if you want to select objects within a series of stacked objects.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window to fit the artboard with the orange shapes into the Document window.
2. With the Selection tool (), click within the gray half-circle shape at the bottom of the artboard to select it. This will become the body of the robot.
Since the shape has a fill (a color, pattern, or gradient filling the inside an object), you can click anywhere within the bounds of the object to select it.

3. Choose Select > Deselect, to deselect the shape.
4. Choose View > Outline to view the artwork as outlines.
5. With the Selection tool, click inside that same half-circle shape.
Notice that you cannot select the object using this method. Outline mode displays artwork as outlines with no fill. To select in Outline mode, you can click the edge of the object or drag a marquee across the shape to select it.

6. Click the Previous artboard button () in the lower-left corner of the Document window to fit the first artboard in the window.
7. On the left artboard, with the Selection tool selected, drag a marquee across the right (smaller) ellipse that makes the robot's eye. Press the Left Arrow key several times to move the ellipse so that it almost touches the ellipse to the left.

8. Choose View > Preview to see the artwork.

Aligning objects
Illustrator makes it easy to align or distribute multiple objects relative to each other, the artboard, or a key object. In this section, you'll explore the different options for aligning objects.


Aligning objects to each other
The simplest type of alignment is aligning objects to each other, and that's what you'll do next.

1. Choose Select > RobotMouth to reselect the orange shapes.
2. Click the Next artboard button () in the lower-left corner of the Document window to fit the artboard with the orange and red shapes in the window.
3. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and drag a marquee around the series of orange-filled shapes to zoom in.

 Note
The Align options may not appear in the Control panel. If you don't see the Align options, click the word "Align" in the Control panel to open the Align panel. The number of options displayed in the Control panel depends on your screen resolution.

4. Choose Align To Selection from the Align To button () in the Control panel, if it's not already selected, to ensure that the selected objects are aligned to each other.

5. Click the Vertical Align Bottom button () in the Control panel.

Notice that the bottom edges of all the orange objects move to align with the lowest orange object.
6. Choose Edit > Undo Align to return the objects to their original positions. Leave the objects selected for the next section.

Aligning to a key object
A key object is an object that you want other objects to align to. You specify a key object by selecting all the objects you want to align, including the key object, and then clicking the key object again. When selected, the key object has a thick outline, and the Align To Key Object icon () appears in the Control panel and the Align panel. Next, you will align the orange shapes.

1. With the orange shapes still selected, click the leftmost shape with the Selection tool ().
The thick blue outline indicates that the leftmost shape is the key object that other objects will align to.


 Note
The key object outline color is determined by the layer color that the object is on.


 Tip
In the Align panel, you can choose Show Options from the panel menu () and then choose Align To Key Object from the Align To option. The object that is in front becomes the key object.

2. Click the Vertical Align Top button () in the Align options in the Control panel. Notice that all of the orange shapes move to align to the top edge of the key object.

3. Choose Select > Deselect.

 Note
To stop aligning and distributing relative to an object, click the object again to remove the blue outline, or choose Cancel Key Object from the Align panel menu ().


Aligning anchor points
Next, you'll align two anchor points to each other using the Align options. Like setting a key object in the previous section, you can also set a key anchor point that other anchor points will align to.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Select the Direct Selection tool (), and click the lower-left point of the gray half-circle at the bottom of the artboard. Shift-click to select the lower-right point of the same gray half-circle.
You select the points in a specific order because the last selected anchor point is the key anchor point. Other points align to this point.
3. Click the Vertical Align Top button () in the Control panel. The first anchor point selected aligns to the second anchor point selected.

4. Choose Select > Deselect.

Distributing objects
Distributing objects using the Align panel enables you to select multiple objects and to distribute the spacing between those objects equally. Next, you will make the spacing between the orange shapes even, using a distribution method.

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Choose Select > RobotMouth to reselect all of the orange shapes.

 Note
Using the Horizontal or Vertical Distribute Center buttons distributes the spacing equally between the centers of the objects. If the selected objects are not the same size, unexpected results may occur.

2. Click the Horizontal Distribute Center button () in the Control panel.

Distributing moves all of the orange shapes so that the spacing between the center of each of them is equal.
3. Choose Edit > Undo Align.
4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. Choose View > Zoom In, twice, to zoom in to the orange shapes.
6. With the Selection tool selected, hold down the Shift key and click/drag the rightmost orange shape slightly to the left. Stop dragging just before the shape touches the orange shape to its left. Release the mouse button and then the key.
The Shift key keeps the shape aligned vertically with the other shapes.


 Note
When distributing objects horizontally, make sure that the leftmost and rightmost objects are where you want them, and then distribute the objects between them. For vertical distribution, position the topmost and bottommost objects, and then distribute the objects between them.

7. Choose Select > RobotMouth to select all of the orange shapes again, and then click the Horizontal Distribute Center button () again. Notice that, with the rightmost shape repositioned, the objects move to redistribute the spacing between the centers.

8. Choose Select > Deselect.

Aligning to the artboard
You can also align content to the artboard rather than to a selection or a key object. Aligning to the artboard aligns each selected object separately to the artboard. Next, you'll get the gray half-circle shape on the artboard with the rest of the robot and align it to the bottom, center of the artboard.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click the gray half-circle shape at the bottom of the artboard to select it. Choose Edit > Cut.
2. Click the Previous artboard button () in the lower-left corner of the Document window to navigate to the first (left) artboard in the document, which contains the robot head.
3. Choose Edit > Paste to paste the gray half-circle.

 Tip
If you need a refresher on the Align To Selection button, refer back to the "Aligning objects to each other" section.

4. Click the Align To Selection button () in the Control panel, and choose Align To Artboard in the menu that appears. Selected content will now align to the artboard.

5. Click the Horizontal Align Center button () (just in case), and then click the Vertical Align Bottom button () to align the selection to the horizontal center and vertical bottom of the artboard.
6. Choose Select > Deselect.

Working with groups
You can combine objects into a group so that the objects are treated as a single unit. This way, you can move or transform a number of objects without affecting their individual attributes or relative positions.


Grouping items
Next, you will select multiple objects and create a group from them.

1. Choose View > Fit All In Window to see both artboards.
2. Choose Select > RobotMouth to reselect the series of orange shapes.


 Tip
One way to select the objects in a group individually is to select the group and then choose Object > Ungroup. This ungroups them permanently.

3. Choose Object > Group, and notice that the word "Group" appears in the Selection Indicator on the left side of the Control panel with the shapes still selected.
4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. With the Selection tool () selected, click one of the orange shapes in the group. Because they are grouped together, all are now selected.

6. Drag the group of orange shapes onto the robot head (below the eyes).
7. Choose Select > Deselect.

Working in Isolation mode
Isolation mode isolates groups or sublayers so that you can easily select and edit specific objects or parts of objects without having to ungroup the objects. When in Isolation mode, all objects outside of the isolated group are locked and dimmed so that they aren't affected by the edits you make.

Next, you will edit a group using Isolation mode.
1. With the Selection tool (), click the robot's hand at the end of the longer arm. You will see that it selects a group of shapes that make up the hand.

 Tip
To enter Isolation mode, you can also select a group with the Selection tool, and then click the Isolate Selected Object button () in the Control panel.

2. Double-click a shape in that hand to enter Isolation mode.
3. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, and notice that the rest of the content in the document appears dimmed (you can't select it).
At the top of the Document window, a gray bar appears with the words "Layer 1" and "<Group>." This indicates that you have isolated a group of objects that is on Layer 1. You will learn more about layers in Lesson 8.
4. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn them off. This way, when you drag content, it won't snap to other content.

 Tip
To exit Isolation mode, you can also click the gray arrow in the upper-left corner of the Document window, or deselect all content and click the Exit Isolation Mode button () in the Control panel. You can also press the Escape key when in Isolation mode or double-click a blank area of the Document window to exit Isolation mode.

5. Drag the light-gray circle down to approximately match the position of the circle shape in the other hand.
When you enter Isolation mode, groups are temporarily ungrouped. This enables you to edit objects in the group or to add new content without having to ungroup.

6. Double-click outside of the shapes within the group to exit Isolation mode.
7. Click to select the circle shape. Notice that it is once again grouped with the rest of the shapes in the hand, and you can also select other objects.
8. Choose Select > Deselect.

Creating a nested group
Groups can also be nested—grouped within other objects or grouped to form larger groups. Nesting is a common technique used when designing artwork. It's a great way to keep associated content together.

In this section, you will explore how to create a nested group.
1. With the Selection tool (), drag a marquee across the series of black shapes below the hand that make up the longer arm of the robot.

2. Choose Object > Group.
3. With the Selection tool, Shift-click the hand above the arm to select that group as well. Choose Object > Group.
You have created a nested group—a group that is combined with other objects or groups to form a larger group.
4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. With the Selection tool, click one of the grouped objects in that same arm. All objects in the nested group become selected.
6. Click a blank area on the artboard to deselect the objects.
Next, you will explore the Group Selection () tool.
7. Hold down the Direct Selection tool () in the Tools panel to reveal more tools. Click the Group Selection tool () to select it. The Group Selection tool adds the object's parent group(s) to the current selection.
8. Click one of the shapes in the same robot hand to select it. Click again, on the same shape, to select the object's parent group (the group of hand shapes). Click once more, on that same shape, to select the group composed of the hand and arm. The Group Selection tool adds each group to the selection in the order in which it was grouped.

9. Choose Select > Deselect.

 Note
To ungroup ALL of the selected objects, even the hand and arm shapes, you would choose Object > Ungroup twice.

10. With the Selection tool, click any of the objects in the nested group to select the group. Choose Object > Ungroup to ungroup the objects.
11. Choose Select > Deselect.
12. Click to select the hand. Notice that it is still a group of objects.

Exploring object arrangement
As you create objects, Illustrator stacks them in order on the artboards, beginning with the first object created. The order in which objects are stacked (called stacking order) determines how they display when they overlap. You can change the stacking order of objects in your artwork at any time, using either the Layers panel or Object > Arrange commands.


 Tip
To learn more about objects and stacking order, see the PDF "Stack_order.pdf" in the Lessons > Lesson_extras folder.


Arranging objects
Next, you will work with the Arrange commands to change how objects are stacked.

1. Choose View > Fit All In Window to see both artboards in the document.
2. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the black shape below the robot's head (the robot's "neck").

3. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to send the shape behind the robot's head.
4. Click to select either of the red circles on the right artboard.

5. Drag the selected circle on top of the smaller eye for the robot. Release the mouse, and notice that the red circle disappears, but it's still selected.
It went behind the ellipse (the eye) because it was probably created before the eye shape, which means it is lower in the stacking order.
6. With the red circle still selected, choose Object > Arrange > Bring to Front. This brings the red circle to the front of the stack, making it the topmost object.

Selecting objects behind
When you stack objects on top of each other, sometimes it becomes difficult to select objects that are underneath other objects. Next, you will learn how to select an object through a stack of objects.

1. With the Selection tool (), select the other red circle on the right artboard, drag it onto the larger robot eye shape on the left artboard, and then release the mouse.
Notice that this circle disappears like the other, but is still selected. This time, you will deselect the circle and then reselect it using another method.

2. Choose Select > Deselect, and the red circle is no longer selected.

 Note
You may see an angle bracket displayed with the pointer ().


 Note
To select the hidden red circle, make sure that you click where the circle and the eye overlap. Otherwise, you won't be able to select the red circle.

3. With the pointer positioned over the location of the second red circle you just deselected, the one behind the eye shape, hold down the Command (Mac OS) or Ctrl (Windows) key and click until the circle is selected again (this may take several clicks).

4. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to bring the circle on top of the eye.
5. Choose Select > Deselect.


Hiding and locking objects
When working on complex artwork, it may become more difficult to make selections. In this section, you'll learn how to lock and hide content to make selecting objects easier.

