4. Click the leftmost artboard, called "Front."
5. Open the Layers panel by choosing Window > Layers, and select the layer named Edit.

6. Shift-drag from the left vertical ruler right to create a vertical guide at 1 inch on the horizontal ruler (the ruler above the artboard) on the "Front" artboard. Release the mouse button, and then release the Shift key.

Dragging with the Shift key pressed "snaps" guides to the measurements on the ruler. The guide is selected and when selected, its color matches the color of the layer that it's associated with (red in this case). By default, guides that are not selected are aqua in color.

 Note
Guides are similar to drawn objects in that they can be selected like a drawn line, and they can be deleted by pressing the Backspace or Delete key, and they also are on the active layer in the Layers panel.


 Tip
To change the units for a document, you can right-click either ruler and choose the new units.

7. With the guide still selected (it should be red in color), change the X value in the Control panel to 0.25 in, and press Enter or Return.
On the horizontal ruler, measurements to the right of 0 (zero) are positive and to the left are negative. On the vertical ruler, measurements below 0 (zero) are positive and above are negative.

 Note
If you don't see the X value, you can click the word "Transform" in the Control panel or open the Transform panel (Window > Transform).

8. Position the pointer in the upper-left corner of the Document window, where the rulers intersect (), and drag the pointer to the lower-left corner of the artboard. When the word "intersect" appears, release the mouse button.
As you drag, a crosshair in the window and in the rulers indicates the changing ruler origin. This sets the ruler origin (0,0) to the lower-left corner of the artboard. This can be very useful when you need to place content a set distance from the bottom edge of the artboard, for instance.


 Tip
If you Command-drag (Mac OS) or Ctrl-drag (Windows) from the ruler intersect, you create a horizontal and vertical guide that intersects where you release the mouse button and then release the Ctrl or Command key.

Next, you'll add a guide using a different method that can sometimes be faster.
9. Select the Zoom tool () and click several times, slowly, on the lower-left corner of the artboard until you see 1/4-inch measurements on the ruler. We had to click at least four times.
10. Shift-double-click the vertical ruler at the 1/4-inch mark (the ruler to the left of the artboard), above the 0 on the ruler. This creates a guide that crosses the bottom edge of the artboard at -0.25 in from the bottom.

11. Position the pointer in the upper-left corner of the Document window, where the rulers intersect (), and double-click to reset the ruler origin.
12. Choose View > Guides > Lock Guides to prevent them from being accidentally moved.
The guides are no longer selected and are aqua in color by default.

 Tip
You can also hide and show guides by pressing Command+; (Mac OS) or Ctrl+; (Windows).

13. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
14. With the Selection tool () selected, select the white text "ALL CITY."
15. Choose View > Hide Edges so you only see the bounding box of the grouped paths.
This hides the inside edges of the shapes, but not the bounding box. It can make it easier to move and position the artwork.
16. Drag the text group into the lower-left corner of the artboard with the guides. When the left and bottom edges snap to the guides, release the mouse button.


Positioning objects precisely
At times, you may want to position objects more precisely—either relative to other objects or to the artboard. You could use the alignments options, like you saw in Lesson 2 "Techniques for Selecting Artwork," but you can also use Smart Guides and the Transform panel to move objects to exact coordinates on the x and y axes and to control the position of objects in relation to the edge of the artboard.

Next, you'll add content to the backgrounds of two artboards and then position that content precisely.
1. Press Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows) (or View > Zoom Out) three times to zoom out. You should see content off the bottom edge of the artboards.
2. Click the artboard with the guides on it (the artboard named Front) to ensure that it is the active artboard (check the origin of the rulers and make sure that 0,0 starts in the upper-left corner of the artboard).
3. With the Selection tool (), click to select the large background shape on the left, below the artboards (see the next figure for which shape).
4. Click the upper-left point of the reference point locator () in the Control panel. Then, change the X value to 0 and the Y value to 0.


 Note
Again, depending on the resolution of your screen, the Transform options may not appear in the Control panel. If they do not appear, you can click the word "Transform" to see the Transform panel, or you can choose Window > Transform.

The content should now be precisely positioned on the artboard, since it was the same size as the artboard to begin with.
5. In the Artboards panel, select the artboard named Back to make it the active artboard.
6. Select the group with the "City Arena" text in it below the artboards. You may need to either zoom out or scroll over and down to see it.
7. With the upper-left point of the reference point locator () selected in the Control panel, change the X value to 0 and the Y value to 0.
Next, you will use Smart Guides to move content. When moving objects with Smart Guides turned on (View > Smart Guides), measurement labels appear next to the pointer and display the distance (X and Y) from the object's original location. You will use these to make sure that an object is a certain distance from the edge of the artboard.

8. With the Selection tool, click to select the basketball hoop with net below the artboards. With the upper-left point of the reference point locator () in the Control panel selected, change the X value to 0 and the Y value to 0.
9. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
10. Using the Selection tool, position the pointer over the selected basketball hoop with net and drag the group down and to the right. As you drag, press the Shift key to constrain the movement to 45°. When the measurement label shows approximately dX: 0.25 in and dY: 0.25 in, release the mouse button, and then the Shift key. Leave the artwork selected.
The dX indicates the distance moved along the x axis (horizontally), and dY indicates the distance moved along the y axis (vertically). Don't worry if you can't get the exact values, it's difficult when zoomed out so far. Also, because there is other content on the canvas, Smart Guides are attempting to snap to it. You can always change the X and Y values in the Control panel or Transform panel.


 Note
You can also choose Illustrator > Preferences > Smart Guides (Mac OS) or Edit > Preferences > Smart Guides (Windows) and deselect the Measurement Labels option to turn off just the measurement labels when Smart Guides are on.

11. Choose File > Save.

Scaling objects
So far in this book, you've scaled most content with the selection tools. In this lesson, you'll use several other methods to scale objects.

1. With the artwork (basketball hoop and net) still selected, ensure that the upper-left point of the reference point locator () is selected in the Control panel. Click to select the Constrain Width And Height Proportions icon () located between the W and H fields. Change the Width (W:) to 255%. Press Enter or Return to accept the value.

 Note
The figure shows the Width value before pressing Enter or Return.

When typing values to transform content, you can type different units such as percent (%) or pixels (px) and they will be converted to the default unit, which is inches (in) in this case.

2. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
3. Press Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows) (or View > Zoom Out) twice to zoom out. You should see content off the bottom edge of the artboards again. You may need to scroll down to see all of the content.
4. Select the basketball and double-click the Scale tool () in the Tools panel.
5. In the Scale dialog box, change Uniform to 61%. Toggle Preview on and off to see the change in size. Click OK.


 Tip
You could also choose Object > Transform > Scale to access the Scale dialog box.

6. Select the Selection tool () and drag the basketball onto the first artboard named "Front," like you see in the figure.

7. Select the basketball court group (without the numbers on it) below the larger artboard. Notice that the Stroke weight in the Control panel shows as 1 pt.
8. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel and click several times, slowly, to zoom in to it.
9. Choose View > Show Edges.
10. Open the Transform panel by clicking the X, Y, W, or H link in the Control panel (or the word "Transform" if that appears in the Control panel). Select Scale Strokes & Effects.
11. In the Control panel, either click the word "Transform" to reveal the Transform panel, or click the center reference point of the reference point locator () in the Control panel. Ensure that the Constrain Width And Height Proportions is set (), and type 3.5 in the Width (W) field, and then press Enter or Return to increase the size of the artwork. Notice that the Stroke weight has scaled as well, and is now 2 pt. Leave the artwork selected.

 Note
Depending on the resolution of your screen, the Transform options may not appear in the Control panel. If they do not appear, you can click the word "Transform" to see the Transform panel or you can choose Window > Transform.

By default, strokes and effects, like drop shadows, are not scaled along with objects. For instance, if you enlarge a circle with a 1 pt stroke, the stroke remains 1 pt. But by selecting Scale Strokes & Effects before you scale—and then scaling the object—that 1 pt stroke would scale (change) relative to the amount of scaling applied to the object.


Reflecting objects
When you reflect an object, Illustrator flips the object across an invisible vertical or horizontal axis. In a similar way to scaling and rotating, when you reflect an object, you either designate the reference point or use the object's center point, by default.

Next, you'll use the Reflect tool () to flip the basketball court artwork 90° across the vertical axis and copy it.

 Tip
If all you want to do is flip content in place, you can also choose Flip Horizontal or Flip Vertical from the Transform panel menu ().

1. Select the Reflect tool (), which is nested within the Rotate tool () in the Tools panel. Click the right edge of the basketball court group (the word "anchor" or "path" may appear).
This sets the invisible axis that the shape will reflect around on the right edge of the selected artwork, rather than on the center, which is the default.


 Tip
You can reflect and copy in one step. With the Reflect tool () selected, Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) to set a point to reflect around and to open the Reflect dialog box, in one step. Select Vertical, and then click Copy.

2. With the basketball court artwork still selected, position the pointer off the right edge and drag clockwise. As you are dragging, hold down the Shift+Option (Mac OS) or Shift+Alt (Windows) keys. When the measurement label shows -90°, release the mouse button and then release the modifier keys.

The Shift key constrains the rotation to 45° as the artwork is reflected, and the Option (Alt) key will copy the artwork. Leave the new court artwork where it is for now. You'll move it later.
3. Select the Selection tool () and drag across both groups, then choose Object > Group.

Distorting objects with effects
You can distort the original shapes of objects in different ways, using various tools. Now you'll distort the basketball net using the Pucker & Bloat effect. These are different types of transformations because they are applied as effects, which means you could ultimately edit the effect later or remove it in the Appearance panel.


 Note
To learn more about effects, see Lesson 11, "Exploring Creative Uses of Effects and Graphic Styles."

1. Choose "2 Inside" from the Artboard Navigation menu to fit the larger artboard in the Document window.
2. Click the Layers panel icon () to open the panel, and then click the visibility column (an arrow is pointing to it in the figure) to the left of the Net layer name to show that content, and click the eye icon () to the left of the Background layer to hide its contents.

You are going to create a net for the basketball hoop that is already on the artboard.
3. Click to select the red triangle shape. Choose Effect > Distort & Transform > Pucker & Bloat.
4. In the Pucker & Bloat dialog box, select Preview and drag the slider to the left to change the value to roughly -20%, which distorts the triangle. Click OK.

5. Drag across the triangle and circle to select them both. Choose Object > Transform > Rotate. In the Rotate dialog box, change the Angle to 30, select Preview, and then click Copy. You will learn more about rotating artwork in the next section.


 Tip
To access the Rotate dialog box, you can also double-click the Rotate tool () in the Tools panel. The Transform panel (Window > Transform) also has a rotate option.

6. Choose Object > Transform > Transform Again to repeat the transformation on the selected shapes.
7. Press Command+D (Mac OS) or Ctrl+D (Windows) once to apply the transformation one more time.

8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then drag across the edge of the circle (see the figure below) to select all of the copies and press Delete.
9. Drag across the triangles to select them all and choose Object > Group.

10. Drag the group down onto the basketball hoop and visually center-align them. Change the Stroke color to White in the Control panel.
11. In the Layers panel, click the visibility column to the left of the Background and the Text layers to show the content for each.

Next, you will apply a Free Distort effect to artwork.
12. Choose "3 Back" from the Artboard Navigation menu and select the basketball net.
13. Choose Effect > Distort & Transform > Free Distort.
14. In the Free Distort dialog, box drag the lower-left and lower-right points so they match the figure. Click OK.


 Tip
Later in this lesson, you will learn about the Free Transform tool () that has a free distort option. Applying a free distort via the Free Transform tool is permanent and affects the underlying artwork, whereas the Free Distort effect can be edited and even removed later because it's an effect.


Rotating objects
You rotate objects by turning them around a designated reference point. There are lots of ways to do this, including methods that range from more precise to more free-form rotation.

First, you'll rotate the basketball manually, using the Selection tool.
1. Choose "1 Front" from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. With the Selection tool (), select the basketball. Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the basketball up and to the left to create a copy. When the artwork is positioned like you see in the figure, release the mouse button and then the modifier key.

3. Position the pointer just off either the upper-right or lower-right corner points of the bounding box of the basketball you just created and when the pointer changes to rotate arrows (), drag in a counterclockwise fashion (up). When the measurement label shows approximately 15°, release the mouse button.

 Tip
You can press the Shift key as you rotate artwork with the Rotate tool () or Selection tool () to constrain the rotation to 45°. Remember to release the mouse button before the key.

Next, you'll rotate content using the Rotate tool () and learn how this method can be different from rotating with the Selection tool.

4. With the Selection tool, Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the selected basketball up and to the left to create another copy. When the artwork is positioned like you see in the following figure, release the mouse button and then the modifier key.

 Tip
To rotate the object around a different reference point, click once anywhere in the document window to reposition the reference point. Then move the pointer away from the reference point and drag in a circular motion.

5. Select the Rotate tool () in the Tools panel (it's under the Reflect tool). Notice the rotate-around point in the center of the basketball artwork. The Rotate tool allows you to rotate the object around a different reference point. Position the pointer to the right of the basketball, and drag counterclockwise (up) until the measurement label shows approximately 15°, and then release the mouse button.


 Tip
If you select an object and then select the Rotate tool (), you can Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) anywhere on the object (or artboard) to set a reference point and to open the Rotate dialog box in one step.

Next, you will rotate each basketball in place using the Transform Each command.
6. With the Selection tool, Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the selected basketball up and to the left to create a final copy. When the artwork is positioned like you see in the following figure, release the mouse button and then the modifier key.

 Tip
You can choose Object > Transform > Transform Each to rotate several selected objects separately, and around the center of each.

7. With the last basketball selected, double-click the Rotate tool in the Tools panel. In the Rotate dialog box that appears, the last rotation value should be the value set for the Angle value. It should be approximately 15°. Make sure it's 15° and click OK.


 Tip
After transforming content using various methods, including rotation, you will notice that the bounding box is now rotated. You can choose Object > Transform > Reset Bounding Box to reset the bounding box around the artwork again.

8. Choose File > Save.

Shearing objects
Shearing an object slants, or skews, the sides of the object along the axis you specify, keeping opposite sides parallel and making the object asymmetrical.

Next, you'll copy artwork and apply shear to it.
1. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
2. Press Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows) (or View > Zoom Out) twice to zoom out. You should see content off the bottom edge of the artboards again.
3. Select the Selection tool (). Click to select the grouped content below the first artboard that contains the "N1," "N2," etc.
4. Choose Edit > Cut, and then choose "3 Back" from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
5. Select the basketball net and choose Object > Hide > Selection.
6. Choose Edit > Paste to paste a copy in the center of the artboard.
7. Begin dragging the group of content up, and as you drag, press the Shift key to constrain the movement. Drag it up until it looks something like you see in the figure. Release the mouse button and then the Shift key.

8. Choose Object > Ungroup and the Select > Deselect.
9. Press Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows) once to zoom in to the artboard.
10. Select the gray square beneath the "N1" text. Select the Shear tool (), nested within the Scale tool () in the Tools panel. Position the pointer above the shape; press the Shift key and drag to the left. The Shift key constrains the artwork to its original width.
If you were shearing a single object and precision didn't matter, you could leave the object as is. But this artwork requires the shapes beneath "N1" and "N3" to have the same shearing applied.

11. Choose Edit > Undo Shear.
12. With the rectangle still selected, double-click the Shear tool. In the Shear dialog box, change the Shear Angle to 170, select Preview, and click OK.

13. With the Selection tool, select the gray rectangle beneath the "N3" text. Double-click the Shear tool in the Tools panel and change the Shear Angle to -170, select Preview, and click OK. Leave the rectangle selected.


 Tip
You can also apply shear numerically in the Transform panel (Window > Transform) or in the Shear dialog box (Object > Transform > Shear).

14. Select the Selection tool, and with the Shift key pressed, select the gray rectangles behind the "N1" and "N2" text to select all three.
15. Choose Object > Group.
16. Select the Rotate tool () and position the pointer over the center of the circle below (circled in the figure). When the green word "center" appears, Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows). In the Rotate dialog box, change the Angle to 180 and click Copy.

17. Choose Object > Show All to show the basketball net you hid earlier.
18. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Transforming with the Free Transform tool
The Free Transform tool () is a multipurpose tool that allows you to distort an object, combining functions like moving, scaling, shearing, rotating, and distorting (perspective or free). The Free Transform tool is also touch-enabled, which means you can control transformation using touch controls on certain devices. For more information on touch controls, see the sidebar at the end of this section.


 Note
To learn more about the options for the Free Transform tool, search for "Free Transform" in Adobe Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Press the Spacebar to access the Hand tool () temporarily. Drag up so you can see the basketball court artwork beneath the artboards.
2. Click to select the basketball court group, and then select the Free Transform tool () in the Tools panel.
After selecting the Free Transform tool, the Free Transform widget appears in the Document window. This widget, which is free-floating and can be repositioned, contains options to change how the Free Transform tool works. By default, the Free Transform tool allows you to move, shear, rotate, and scale objects. By selecting other options, like Perspective Distort, you can change how the tool transforms content.

First, you'll change the width of the selected artwork using the Free Transform tool.

 Note
If you were to drag the side bounding point up first to distort the artwork by shearing, the movement wouldn't be constrained and you could move in any direction.

3. Position the pointer over the left middle point of the artwork bounding box, and the pointer changes its appearance (), indicating that you can shear or distort. Begin dragging to the right. As you drag, press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key to change both sides at once. Notice that you can't drag the artwork up or down—the movement is constrained to horizontal by default. When a width of approximately 3.7 in shows in the measurement label, release the mouse button and then the key.

Next, you will rotate with the Free Transform tool around a specific point.
4. Position the pointer over the lower-left corner and double-click when the pointer looks like this (). This moves the reference point and ensures that the artwork will rotate around it. Press the Shift key and drag the upper-right corner in a counterclockwise fashion until you see 90° in the measurement label. Release the mouse button and then the Shift key.


 Tip
You can also drag the reference point to a location. You can double-click the reference point to reset its position.


 Note
If you find that, by trying to rotate, you are instead scaling, stop dragging and choose Edit > Undo Scale and try again.

Like other transform tools, by holding down the Shift key while dragging with the Free Transform tool, you can constrain the movement for most of the transformations. If you don't want to hold down the Shift key, you can also select the Constrain option in the Free Transform widget before transforming, to constrain movement automatically. After dragging, the Constrain option is deselected.
5. Position the pointer over the right middle point of the artwork bounding box, and drag to the right. Drag until a width of approximately 7.7 in shows in the measurement label.


 Note
The Constrain option cannot be selected when the Perspective Distort option is selected.

6. With the Free Transform tool still selected, click the Perspective Distort option in the Free Transform widget (circled in the figure below).
With this option selected, you can drag a corner point of the bounding box to distort the perspective.

 Note
The Free Distort option of the Free Transform tool () allows you to freely distort the selected content by dragging one of the corner bounding points.

7. Position the pointer over the upper-left corner of the bounding box, and the pointer changes in appearance (). Drag to the right until it looks like the figure.

8. Change the Opacity to 60% in the Control panel.
9. Press Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows) several times to zoom out, until you see the artboard with the basketballs on it.
10. Select the Selection tool and drag the artwork onto the artboard similar to what you see in the figure.


 Note
If the artwork appears on top of the text, choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back as many times as necessary to arrange it behind the text.

11. Select the Artboard tool () in the Tools panel. Drag the 1 Front artboard to the left until the basketball court is no longer overlapping the artboard to the right.


 Tip
You could also simply mask the content that is outside of the artboard. You will learn about clipping masks in Lesson 14, "Using Illustrator CC with Other Adobe Applications."


 Note
When you drag an artboard with content on it, the art moves with the artboard, by default. If you want to move an artboard but not the art on it, select the Artboard tool () and then click to deselect Move/Copy Artwork With Artboard () in the Control panel.

12. Choose View > Fit All In Window and then choose Choose File > Save.

The Free Transform tool and touch-enabled devices
In Illustrator CC, the Free Transform tool is touch-enabled. This means that, if you are using either a Windows 7- or 8-based touchscreen PC or a Touchscreen device like Wacom Cintiq 24HD Touch, you can utilize certain touch-enabled features.
Here are a few noteworthy examples:
• You can touch and drag from the center of an object and move the reference point.
• Double tapping on any of the corner points moves the reference point for the object to that point.
• Double tapping on the reference point resets it to the default position (if it's not already there).
• To constrain movement, you can tap the Constrain option in the widget before transforming.


Creating a PDF
Portable Document Format (PDF) is a universal file format that preserves the fonts, images, and layout of source documents created on a wide range of applications and platforms. Adobe PDF is the standard for the secure, reliable distribution and exchange of electronic documents and forms around the world. Adobe PDF files are compact and complete, and can be shared, viewed, and printed by anyone with free Adobe Reader® software.

You can create different types of PDF files from within Illustrator. You can create multipage PDFs, layered PDFs, and PDF/x-compliant files. Layered PDFs allow you to save one PDF with layers that can be used in different contexts. PDF/X compliant files ease the burden of color, font, and trapping issues in printing. Next, you will save this project as a PDF so that you can send it to someone else to view.
1. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, choose Adobe PDF (pdf) from the Format menu (Mac OS) or Adobe PDF (*.PDF) from the Save As Type menu (Windows). Navigate to the Lessons > Lesson04 folder, if necessary. Notice that you have the option, at the bottom of the dialog box, to save all of the artboards in the PDF or a range of artboards. Click Save.

 Note
If you want to learn about the options and other presets in the Save Adobe PDF dialog box, choose Help > Illustrator Help and search for "Creating Adobe PDF files."

2. In the Save Adobe PDF dialog box, click the Adobe PDF Preset menu to see all of the different PDF presets available. Ensure that [Illustrator Default] is chosen and click Save PDF.

There are many ways that you can customize the creation of a PDF. Creating a PDF using the [Illustrator Default] preset creates a PDF in which all Illustrator data is preserved. PDFs created with this preset can be reopened in Illustrator without any loss of data. If you are planning on saving a PDF for a particular purpose, such as viewing on the Web or printing, you may wish to choose another preset or adjust the options.
3. Choose File > Save, if necessary, and then choose File > Close.

Review questions
1. Name two ways to change the size of an existing active artboard.

2. How can you rename an artboard?
3. What is the ruler origin?
4. What is the difference between artboard rulers and global rulers?
5. Briefly describe what the Scale Strokes & Effects option does.
6. Name at least three transformations that can be applied with the Free Transform tool.

Review answers
1. To change the size of an existing artboard, you can double-click the Artboard tool () and edit the dimensions of the active artboard in the Artboard Options dialog box. Select the Artboard tool, position the pointer over an edge or corner of the artboard, and drag to resize. Select the Artboard tool, click an artboard in the Document window, and change the dimensions in the Control panel.

2. To rename an artboard, you can select the Artboard tool () and click within the bounds of an artboard to select it. Then, change the name in the Name field in the Control panel. You can also double-click the name of the artboard in the Artboards panel () to rename it or click the Options button () in the Artboards panel to enter the name in the Artboard Options dialog box.
3. The ruler origin is the point where 0 (zero) appears on each ruler. By default, the ruler origin is set to be 0 (zero) in the top-left corner of the active artboard.
4. There are two types of rulers in Illustrator: artboard rulers and global rulers. Artboard rulers, which are the default rulers, set the ruler origin at the upper-left corner of the active artboard. Global rulers set the ruler origin at the upper-left corner of the first artboard, no matter which artboard is active.
5. The Scale Strokes & Effects option, found in the Transform panel (or in Illustrator > Preferences > General [Mac OS] or Edit > Preferences > General [Windows]), scales any strokes and effects as the object is scaled. This option can be turned on and off, depending on the current need.
6. The Free Transform tool () can perform a multitude of transformation operations, including move, scale, rotate, shear, and distort (perspective distort and free distort).







5. Creating an Illustration with the Drawing Tools

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Draw curved and straight lines.
• Edit curved and straight lines.
• Draw with the Pen tool.
• Select and adjust curve segments.
• Add and delete anchor points.
• Convert between smooth points and corner points.
• Create dashed lines and add arrowheads.
• Cut paths with the Scissors and Knife tools.
• Draw and edit with the Pencil tool.

This lesson takes approximately 90 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



Although the Pencil tool is preferable for drawing and editing free-form lines, the Pen tool and Curvature tool are excellent for drawing precisely, including drawing straight lines, Bezier curves, and complex shapes. You'll practice using the Pen tool, and then use all of these tools to create an illustration of a dish of ice cream.


Getting started
In the first part of this lesson, you'll ease into working with the Pen tool.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of this book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Open the L5_practice.ai file in the Lesson05 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.
The document is made up of six artboards, numbered 1 through 6 (you most likely won't see all six, like in the figure). As you progress through the first part of this lesson, you will be asked to move to the next artboard.

4. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the Lesson05 folder and open it. Rename the file to Practice.ai. Choose Adobe Illustrator (ai) from the Format menu (Mac OS), or choose Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) from the Save As Type menu (Windows). Click Save and, in the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the default settings, and then click OK.

Getting started with the Pen tool
The Pen tool () is one of the main drawing tools that is used to create both free-form and more precise artwork and also plays a role in editing existing vector artwork. It's important to have an understanding of the Pen tool when working with Illustrator. Just know that it takes plenty of practice to feel comfortable with the tool.

In this first section, you'll begin to explore the Pen tool and, later in the lesson, you will create artwork using the Pen tool and other tools and commands. Next, you'll get ready to begin drawing.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

1. Choose 1 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.
3. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn off the Smart Guides. Smart Guides can be useful when you draw, but you won't need them now.
4. In the Control panel, click Fill color and choose None (). Then, click the Stroke color and make sure that the Black swatch is selected.
5. Make sure the Stroke weight is 1 pt in the Control panel.
When you begin drawing with the Pen tool, it's usually best to have no fill on the path you create because the fill can cover the path you are trying to create. You can add a fill later, if necessary. Next, you'll draw a path in the work area of the artboard that looks like the zigzag path at the top of the artboard.
6. Select the Pen tool () in the Tools panel. Position the pointer in the artboard area, and notice the asterisk next to the Pen icon (), indicating that you are starting a path.

 Note
If you see a crosshair () instead of the Pen icon (), the Caps Lock key is active. Caps Lock turns tool icons into crosshairs for increased precision.

7. In the area labeled Work Area, click where the blue "start" square is, to set the first anchor point. Move the pointer to the right of the original point and you will see a line connecting the first point and the pointer, no matter where you move the pointer. This is called Pen tool preview (or Rubber Band). Later, as you create curved paths, it will make drawing them easier.

 Tip
You can turn off the Pen tool preview by choosing Illustrator > Preferences > Selection & Anchor Display (Mac OS) or Edit > Preferences > Selection & Anchor Display (Windows) to open the Preferences dialog box. In the dialog box, with the Selection & Anchor Display category options showing, deselect Enable Rubber Band for Pen and Curvature Tool.

The asterisk has disappeared, indicating that you are now drawing a path.
8. Position the pointer down and to the right of the original point, and click to create the next anchor point in the path.


 Note
The first segment you draw is not visible until you click to create a second anchor point. If the path looks curved, you have accidentally dragged with the Pen tool; choose Edit > Undo Pen, and then click again.

9. Click a third anchor point beneath the initial anchor point to create a zigzag pattern. Create a zigzag that has a total of six anchor points, which means you will click the artboard three more times.

One of the many benefits of using the Pen tool is that you can create custom paths and continue to edit the anchor points that make up the path. Notice that only the last anchor point is filled (not hollow like the rest of the anchor points), indicating that it is selected.
10. Choose Select > Deselect.
The type of anchor points you just created are called corner points. Corner points are not smooth like a curve; rather, they create an angle where the anchor point is. Now that you can create corner points, you will move on to adding other types of points like smooth points. But first, you will learn a few more techniques for selecting paths.

Selecting paths
Back in Lesson 2 "Techniques for Selecting Artwork," you were introduced to selecting content with the Selection and Direct Selection tools. Next, you'll explore a few more options for selecting artwork with those same Selection tools.

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and position the pointer directly over a straight line in the zigzag path. When the pointer shows a solid black box () next to it, click.

 Tip
You can also drag across a path to select it with the Selection tool.

This selects the path and all of the anchor points. You can tell the anchor points are selected because they become filled.

2. Drag from one of the straight lines in the path to a new location anywhere on the artboard. All the anchor points travel together, maintaining the zigzag path.


 Tip
If the Pen tool () were still selected, you could Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) in a blank area of the artboard to deselect the path. This temporarily selects a Selection tool. When you release the Ctrl or Command key, the Pen tool is selected again.

3. Deselect the zigzag path in one of the following ways:
• With the Selection tool, click an empty area of the artboard.
• Choose Select > Deselect.
4. In the Tools panel, select the Direct Selection tool () and when the pointer changes (), click the path to reveal all of the anchor points. Position the pointer over one of the anchor points and the anchor point will become larger than the others, and the pointer will show a small box with a dot in the center () next to it (the following figure shows this). Both of these indicate that if you click, you will select the anchor point. Click to select the anchor point and the selected anchor point is filled (looks solid), whereas the deselected anchor points are still hollow.


 Note
When you position the pointer over a line segment that is not already selected, a black, solid square appears next to the Direct Selection tool pointer, indicating that you will select a line segment.

5. Drag the anchor point to the left a bit to reposition it.
The anchor point moves, but the others remain stationary. This is one method for editing a path, like you saw in Lesson 2.

6. Click in a blank area of the artboard to deselect.
7. Position the Direct Selection pointer over a straight line segment in the middle of the zigzag shape. When the pointer changes (), click to select. Choose Edit > Cut. This cuts only the selected segment from the zigzag.


 Note
If the entire zigzag path disappears, choose Edit > Undo Cut and try again.

8. Select the Pen tool (), and position the pointer over one of the end anchor points that was connected to the line segment that was cut. Notice that the Pen tool shows a forward slash (), indicating that if you click, you will continue drawing from that anchor point. Click the point.

9. Position the pointer over the other anchor point that was connected to the cut line segment. The pointer now shows a merge symbol next to it (), indicating that you are connecting to another path. Click the point to reconnect the paths.


Constraining lines
In previous lessons, you learned that using the Shift key and Smart Guides in combination with shape tools constrains the shape of objects. The Shift key and Smart Guides can also constrain paths drawn with the Pen tool to create paths in angles of 45°. Next, you will learn how to draw straight lines and constrain angles as you draw.

1. Choose 2 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn on the Smart Guides.
3. With the Pen tool () selected, in the area labeled Work Area, click where the blue "start" square is to set the first anchor point.
Don't worry if the Smart Guides are attempting to "snap" the anchor point you create to other content on the artboard, making it difficult to click directly on the "start" square. This is expected behavior and is sometimes why we turn off the Smart Guides when drawing.
4. Move the pointer to the right of the original anchor point approximately 1.5 in, as indicated by the measurement label. It doesn't have to be exact. A green alignment guide appears when the pointer is vertically aligned with the previous anchor point. Click to set another anchor point.


 Tip
If Smart Guides are turned off, you will need to press the Shift key and click to create constrained lines.

As you've learned in previous lessons, the measurement label and alignment guides are a part of the Smart Guides. When working with the Pen tool, you can achieve finer measurements in the measurement labels when you zoom in.
5. Click to set three more points, following the same generic shape as shown in the top half of the artboard.


 Note
The points you set don't have to be in exactly the same position as the path at the top of the artboard. Also, the measurement you see in your measurement label may not match what you see in the figure, and that's okay.

Notice the green alignment guides that appear as you draw. Sometimes they are helpful for aligning points, and sometimes they align to content that you don't necessarily want to align to.
6. Press the Shift key, and move the pointer to the right and down. When the measurement label shows 2 in, click to set an anchor point, and then release the modifier key.

Notice that the new anchor point may not be where you clicked. That's because the line has been constrained to 45°. Pressing the Shift key creates angled lines constrained to 45°.
7. Position the pointer below the last point, and click to set the last anchor point for the shape.

8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Introducing curved paths
In this part of the lesson, you'll learn how to draw smooth, curved lines with the Pen tool. In vector drawing applications such as Illustrator, you draw a curve, called a Bezier curve, with anchor points and direction handles. By setting anchor points and dragging direction handles, you can define the shape of the curve. This type of anchor point, with direction handles, is called a smooth point. Although drawing curves this way can take some time to learn, it gives you the greatest control and flexibility in creating paths.

First, you'll just get the feel for how to create a curved path. The goal for this exercise is not to create anything specific but to get accustomed to the feel of creating Bezier curves.
1. Choose View > Smart Guides to deselect them.
2. Choose 3 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window. You will draw in the area labeled Practice.
3. Press Z to switch to the Zoom tool () (or select it in the Tools panel), and click twice in the bottom half of the artboard to zoom in.
4. Select the Pen tool () in the Tools panel. In the Control panel, make sure that the Fill color is None () and the Stroke color is Black. Also, make sure the Stroke weight is still 1 pt in the Control panel.
5. With the Pen tool selected, click in a blank area of the artboard to create a starting anchor point.
6. Move the pointer away from the original point you created, and click and drag away from the point to create a curved path.

Notice that as you drag away from the point, direction handles appear. Direction handles consist of direction lines that end in round direction points. The angle and length of the direction handles determine the shape and size of the curve. Direction handles do not print and are not visible when the anchor point is inactive.
7. Move the pointer away from the anchor point you just created to see the Rubber Band (Pen tool preview). Move the pointer around a bit to see how it changes. Continue clicking and dragging in different areas to create a series of points.

8. Choose Select > Deselect. Leave the file open for the next section.

Components of a path
As you draw, you create a line called a path. A path is made up of one or more straight or curved segments. The beginning and end of each segment are marked by anchor points, which work like pins holding a wire in place. A path can be closed (for example, a circle) or open, with distinct endpoints (for example, a wavy line). You change the shape of a path by dragging its anchor points, the direction points at the end of direction lines that appear at anchor points, or the path segment itself.


A. Anchor pointB. Direction lineC. Direction point

Paths can have two kinds of anchor points: corner points and smooth points. At a corner point, a path abruptly changes direction. At a smooth point, path segments are connected as a continuous curve.

You can draw a path using any combination of corner and smooth points. If you draw the wrong kind of point, you can always change it.
—From Illustrator Help


Drawing a curve with the Pen tool
In this part of the lesson, you'll use what you just learned to trace a curved shape with the Pen tool.

1. Press the spacebar to temporarily select the Hand tool (), and drag down until you see the curve at the top of the artboard (on Artboard 3).
2. Select the Pen tool () in the Tools panel. Click and drag from the "start" square, up to the gold dot, and then release the mouse button. This creates a direction line going in the same direction as the path.


 Note
The artboard may scroll as you drag. If you lose visibility of the curve, choose View > Zoom Out until you see the curve and anchor point. Pressing the spacebar allows you to use the Hand tool to reposition the artwork.

3. Click the black point on the right side of the arch and drag down. Release the mouse button when the pointer reaches the gold dot and the path you are creating follows the arch.


 Note
Pulling the direction handle longer makes a steeper slope; when the direction handle is shorter, the slope is flatter.

If the path you created is not aligned exactly with the template, select the Direct Selection tool () and select the anchor points one at a time to show the direction handles. You can then adjust the direction handles using the Direct Selection tool until your path follows the template more accurately.
4. Select the Selection tool (), and click the artboard in an area with no objects, or choose Select > Deselect.

 Tip
To deselect objects, you can also press the Command (Mac OS) or Ctrl (Windows) key to temporarily switch to the Selection or Direct Selection tool, whichever was last used, then, click the artboard where there are no objects. Another way to end a path is to press the Escape key when you are finished drawing.

Deselecting the first path allows you to create a new path. If you click somewhere on the artboard with the Pen tool while the path is still selected, the path connects to the next point you draw.
5. Choose File > Save.
If you want to try drawing the curve for more practice, scroll down to the Practice area in the same artboard and trace the curve.

Drawing a series of curves with the Pen tool
Now that you've experimented with drawing a few curves, you will draw a shape that contains several continuous curves.

1. Choose 4 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window. Select the Zoom tool (), and click several times in the top half of the artboard to zoom in.
2. In the Control panel, make sure that the Fill color is None () and the Stroke color is Black. Also, make sure the Stroke weight is still 1 pt in the Control panel.
3. Select the Pen tool (). Click the blue "start" square, and drag up in the direction of the arch, stopping at the gold dot.
4. Position the pointer over the black square point to the right, click and drag down to the gold dot, adjusting the first arch with the direction handle before you release the mouse button.


 Note
Don't worry if the path you draw is not exact. You can correct the line with the Direct Selection tool () when the path is complete.

5. Continue along the path, alternating between dragging up and down. Put anchor points only where there are black squares (points).

If you make a mistake as you draw, you can undo your work by choosing Edit > Undo Pen and then draw the last point again. Note that your direction lines may not match the figure at right, and that's okay.
6. When the path is complete, select the Direct Selection tool and click to select an anchor point.

 Note
For more information about these attributes, see Lesson 6, "Using Color and Patterns to Enhance Signage."

When the anchor point is selected, the direction handles appear and you can readjust the curve of the path if necessary. With a curve selected, you can also change the stroke and fill of the curve. When you do this, the next line you draw will have the same attributes.
If you want to try drawing the shape again for more practice, scroll down to the bottom half of the same artboard (labeled Practice) and trace the shape down there.
7. Choose File > Save.

Converting smooth points to corner points
When creating curves, the direction handles help to determine the shape and size of the curved segments, as you've already seen. Removing the direction lines from an anchor point can convert a smooth curve into a corner. In the next part of the lesson, you will practice converting between smooth points and corner points.

1. Choose 5 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
On the top of the artboard, you can see the path that you will trace. You will use the top artboard as a template for the exercise, creating your paths directly on top of those. Use the Practice section at the bottom of the artboard for additional practice on your own.
2. In the top artboard, use the Zoom tool () and click several times to zoom in.
3. In the Control panel, make sure that the Fill color is None () and the Stroke color is Black. Also, make sure the Stroke weight is still 1 pt in the Control panel.
4. Select the Pen tool (), and pressing the Shift key, click the blue "start" square and drag up to the gold dot. Release the mouse button, and then release the Shift key.

 Note
Pressing the Shift key when dragging constrains the direction handles to multiples of 45°.

5. Click the next black anchor point to the right, and pressing the Shift key, drag down to the red dot. When the curve looks correct, release the mouse button and then release the Shift key. Leave the path selected.
Now you need the curve to switch directions and create another arch. You will split the direction lines to convert a smooth point to a corner point.

 Tip
After you draw a path, you can also select single or multiple anchor points and click the Convert Selected Anchor Points To Corner button () or Convert Selected Anchor Points To Smooth button () in the Control panel.

6. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and position the pointer over either the last anchor point created or the bottom direction point. When a convert-point icon (^) appears next to the Pen tool pointer (), click and drag a direction line up to the gold dot. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key. If you do not see the caret, you may create an additional loop.

You can practice adjusting the direction handles with the Direct Selection tool () when the path is completed.
7. Position the Pen tool pointer over the next (third) black square point on the template path, and drag down to the red dot. Release the mouse button when the path looks similar to the template path.
8. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and after the convert-point icon (^) appears, position the pointer over the anchor point or direction point and drag up to the gold dot. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key.
For the next (fourth) point, you will not release the mouse button to split the direction handles, so pay close attention.

9. For the fourth anchor point, click the next black square on the template path and drag down to the red dot until the path looks correct. This time, do not release the mouse button. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and drag up to the gold dot for the next curve. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key.
10. Continue this process using the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key to create corner points until the path is completed.
11. Use the Direct Selection tool to fine-tune the path, and then deselect the path.
If you want to try drawing the same shape for more practice, scroll down to the Practice area in the same artboard and trace the shape down there.

Combining curves and straight lines
Of course in the real world, when you draw with the Pen tool, you won't just create either curves or straight lines. In this next section, you'll learn how to go from curves to straight lines and from straight lines to curves.

1. Choose 6 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window. Select the Zoom tool (), and click several times in the top half of the artboard to zoom in.
2. Select the Pen tool (). Click the blue "start" square, and drag up. Release the mouse button when the pointer reaches the gold dot.
3. Drag down from the second anchor point, and release the mouse button when the pointer reaches the gold dot and the arch matches the template. This method of creating a curve should be familiar to you by now.

If you were to click on the next black anchor point (don't), even pressing the Shift key (to produce a straight line), the path would be curved. The last point you created is a smooth anchor point and has a direction line after the point. The figure at right shows what the path would look like if you clicked with the Pen tool on the next point.
You will now continue the path as a straight line.
4. Position the pointer over the last point created (notice that the convert-point icon appears [^]), and click to delete the leading direction handle from the anchor point, as shown in the figure.

5. Press the Shift key, and click the next point in the template path to the right to set the next point, creating a straight segment.

6. For the next arch, position the pointer over the last point created (notice that the convert-point icon appears [^]), and then drag down from that point to the gold dot. This creates a new direction line.

7. Click the next point, and drag up to complete the arch.
8. Click the last anchor point you just created to remove the direction line.
9. Shift-click the next point to create the second straight segment.
10. Click and drag up from the last point created to create a direction line, and then click and drag down on the end point to create the final arch.

 Tip
Deselect before practicing with the next shape.

If you want to try drawing the same shape for more practice, scroll down to the Practice area in the same artboard and trace the shape down there.
11. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.

Creating the ice cream illustration
With a bit of Pen tool practice behind you, in this next part of the lesson, you'll create an illustration of a dish of ice cream. You'll use the new skills you learned in the previous exercises, and you'll also learn some additional techniques and tools.

1. Choose File > Open, and open the L5_end.ai file in the Lesson05 folder, located in the Lessons folder.
2. Choose View > Fit All In Window to see the finished artwork. (Use the Hand tool [] to move the artwork to where you want it.) If you don't want to leave the artwork open, choose File > Close.
3. Choose File > Open, and open the L5_start.ai file in the Lesson05 folder. Choose View > Fit All In Window.

4. Choose File > Save As, name the file IceCream.ai, and select the Lesson05 folder in the Save As dialog box. Choose Adobe Illustrator (ai) from the Format menu (Mac OS) or choose Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) from the Save As Type menu (Windows), and click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the options set at the defaults, and then click OK.

Drawing the ice cream with the Pen tool
To start with, you'll draw an ice cream shape, which combines curves and corners. Just take your time as you practice with this shape, and use the guides provided to assist you in drawing it.


 Tip
Don't forget, you can always undo a point you've drawn (Edit > Undo Pen) and then try again.

1. Choose View > Ice Cream to zoom in to the ice cream path to the right of the text "Flavor of the month."

 Note
On Windows, you may need to scroll down in the panel menu.

2. In the Control panel, make sure that the Fill color is None () and the Stroke color is Black.
3. Make sure the Stroke weight is 1 pt in the Control panel.
4. With the Pen tool () selected, drag from the blue square labeled A to the red dot beneath it to set the starting anchor point and direction of the first curve.


 Note
You do not have to start at the blue square (point A) to draw this shape. You can set anchor points for a path with the Pen tool in a clockwise or counterclockwise direction.

5. Continue on, dragging from point B to the red dot, to create the first curve.
The next point you create will be converted from a smooth point to a corner point.


 Note
If you find that the path you are drawing has a fill of white, some of the dots in the template will be hidden. You can always change the fill to None () for the path you are drawing.

6. Drag from point C to the red dot, but don't release the mouse button yet. With the pointer over the red dot, hold down the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and continue dragging from the red dot to the gold dot below the point. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key. This splits the direction handles.

7. Drag from point D to the red dot. As you drag, pay attention to how the path looks between points C and D.
8. Click point E, without dragging, to create a corner point with no direction lines.
You'll find that setting an anchor point without direction lines (a corner point) allows you to set a point with no curve.
9. For points F and G, drag from each point to the red dot to create curves.

10. Drag from point H to the red dot, but don't release the mouse button yet. When the pointer reaches the red dot, hold down the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and continue dragging from the red dot to the gold dot. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key.

11. Drag from point I to the red dot, hold down the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and continue dragging from the red dot to the gold dot. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key. This splits the direction handles.

As you draw with the Pen tool, you may want to edit a curve you previously drew without ending the path you are drawing. Pressing a modifier key with the Pen tool selected, you can position the pointer over a previous path segment and drag to modify it, which is what you'll do next.

 Tip
You can also press the Option+Shift (Mac OS) or Alt+Shift (Windows) keys to constrain the handles to a perpendicular direction, which ensures that the handles are the same length.

12. Position the pointer over the path between points H and I and press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key. The pointer changes appearance (). Drag the path up and to the left to make the path have more curve, like you see in the figure. Release the mouse button and then the key. Now, you can continue drawing the path.

For the next point, J, you will create a smooth point, but you will edit the direction handles independently using a modifier key as you draw. For the next step, don't release the mouse button until you are told.

 Note
You could also create the point in this step by dragging with the Shift key pressed and releasing the mouse button when the pointer reaches the red dot. You could then position the Pen tool icon over the anchor point. When the convert-point icon (^) appears next to the pointer, you could drag out a new direction handle.

13. Begin dragging from point J to the red dot on the right. As you drag, press and hold the Shift key to constrain the direction lines. When the pointer reaches the red dot, release the Shift key but not the mouse button. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and continue dragging the direction point (at the end of the direction line) from the red dot to the gold dot to make just that one direction handle longer. When the pointer reaches the gold dot, release the mouse button, and then release the key.

14. Continue drawing the point at K by first dragging from the anchor point to the red dot, and then pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and dragging from the red dot to the gold dot.
Next, you'll complete the drawing of the ice cream by closing the path.
15. Position the Pen tool over the starting point A without clicking.
Notice that an open circle appears next to the Pen tool pointer (), indicating that the path will close if you were to click the anchor point (don't click yet). If you were to click and drag, the direction handles on either side of the point would move as a single straight line. We need to split the direction handles so the final point is a corner point.


 Tip
When creating a closing anchor point, you can press the spacebar to move the point.

16. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key with the pointer still over point A. Click and drag straight down and notice that a direction handle shows, but is going in the opposite direction (it's going up). Drag to the gold dot labeled "Final." Release the mouse button and then the key.

As you drag down, another direction line appears above the point. Without the modifier key, as you drag away from closing point, you are reshaping the path before and after the anchor point. Pressing the Option/Alt modifier key on the closing point allows you to edit the previous direction handle independently.
17. Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) away from the path to deselect it, and then choose File > Save.
This is a shortcut method for deselecting a path while keeping the Pen tool selected. You could also choose Select > Deselect, among other methods.

Drawing the dish with the Curvature tool
With the Curvature tool (), you can draw and edit paths quickly and visually to create paths with smooth refined curves and straight lines. Using the Curvature tool, you can also edit paths while drawing or after the path is complete using the same tool.

In this section, you'll explore the Curvature tool while creating a dish for the ice cream you already drew.
1. Choose 2 Dish from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window (if necessary).
Looking at the template path, you will see a vertical red dotted line running through the A and I points. After you draw half of the ice cream dish, you will copy and reflect it around the red dotted line, then join the two halves together.
2. Select the Curvature tool () in the Tools panel. Click the blue square at point A to set the starting anchor point.

 Note
You do not have to start at the blue square (point A) to draw this shape. You can set anchor points for a path with the Curvature tool (like the Pen tool) in a clockwise or counterclockwise direction.

3. Press the Shift key, and click on point B (to the left of A). After clicking, release the key.

4. Move the pointer away from point B and notice the preview of the curve before and after point B.
The Curvature tool works by creating anchor points where you click. The drawing curve will "flex" around the points dynamically. Direction handles are created when necessary to curve the path for you. If you were to click in this instance, the curve preview you see would become the drawn path.

5. Press the Shift key, and click point C to align the anchor points B and C. Release the Shift key after clicking and notice the new curved path.

6. Hover the pointer over point B and the pointer will change (). Double-click to convert the smooth point to a corner point.

Double-clicking a point, which converts it to a corner point, has the effect of splitting the direction handles for the point.
7. Hover the pointer over point D and click to set the next point.
Notice that the path segments before and after point C are curved.

8. Hover the pointer over the anchor point at D. When the pointer changes () double-click to convert the point to a corner point.
The points you create with the Curvature tool can have three appearances, indicating it's current state: selected (), corner point (not selected []), and smooth point (not selected []).
9. Shift-click point E to create a point.
Notice that the path doesn't follow the dotted line of the template path between points D and E. As you draw with the Curvature tool, you can easily go back and make corrections, even adding and deleting points, and then continue drawing.

 Tip
If you click an existing point with the Curvature tool, it becomes selected (). You can then press Delete or Backspace to remove it.

10. Hover the pointer over the path segment between the D and E points. When a plus (+) appears next to the pointer, click and drag to the left to create a point and curve the path. Drag to match the dotted template.

Now you can just continue drawing the path with the Curvature tool.
11. Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) point F and notice that the path at point E is curved.
By Option-clicking (Mac OS) or Alt-clicking (Windows) when you create a point with the Curvature tool, you create a corner point instead of the default smooth point.

12. Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) point E to make it a corner point.
13. Shift-click point G.
14. Click point H and then click point I.


 Note
To close a path with the Curvature tool, hover the pointer over the first point you created in the path and a circle appears next to the pointer (). Click to close the path.

15. Press the Escape key to stop drawing and then choose Select > Deselect.

Finishing the ice cream dish
With one-half of the shape created, you will now create a copy, reflect the copy, and then join the two halves together to make a perfectly symmetrical closed shape—the ice cream dish. To learn more about reflecting objects, see Lesson 4, "Transforming Artwork."

The first step is to make sure that the first and last anchor points are lined up vertically with each other.
1. Select the Direct Selection tool (), and click the last point you created (at point I). Shift-click the first point you created on the ice cream dish (at point A) to select both of the points at I and A.

2. Click the Horizontal Align Center button () in the Control panel to align the points.
Aligning the points isn't necessary to copy and join two halves, but aligning them will ensure that extra points won't be added when you join the halves together.

 Note
The Align options may not appear in the Control panel. You can either click the word "Align" in the Control panel or choose Window > Align to see the align options.

3. Select the Selection tool ().
4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then click to select the entire path.
5. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn on the Smart Guides.
6. Position the pointer over the Rotate tool (), click and hold down the mouse button to reveal more tools. Select the Reflect tool ().
7. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the Layers panel. Click the eye icon () to the left of the layer named "template" to hide its contents. Click the Layers panel tab to hide the panel.

8. Position the pointer over the last (bottom) anchor point (I). When the word "anchor" appears, Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows).


 Note
The modifier key sets the point that the shape will reflect around and opens the Reflect dialog box so you can copy the shape in one step.

9. In the Reflect dialog box that opens, select Vertical, if it's not already selected, and then click Copy.
10. Select the Selection tool, and choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select both halves.

11. Press Command+J (Mac OS) or Ctrl+J (Windows) to join the two halves together into one closed path. Leave the path selected.
After doing this, it may not look like much has changed, when in fact both halves are combined into a single, closed path.

Editing curves
In this part of the lesson, you'll adjust curves you've drawn using several methods learned previously and a few new ones.

1. Choose Select > Deselect.
2. Select the Direct Selection tool () and drag across the two points shown in the following figure to select them.
Notice that a Live Corners widget shows next to each of the anchor points. With both points selected, you can edit the radius of both by dragging one of the Live Corners widgets.

3. Drag the Live Corners widget on the right point to the right just a bit to make the path smoother. When the measurement label shows a radius of roughly 0.2 in, release the mouse button.

4. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn off the Smart Guides.
Next, you'll edit the ice cream shape you created earlier.
5. Choose View > Ice Cream.
Aside from zooming in on the ice cream path, the content from the template layer should be displayed as well, showing the guides you used to draw the path.
6. With the Direct Selection tool selected, click the ice cream path to select it. All of the anchor points will appear.
Clicking with the Direct Selection tool displays the direction handles for the selected line segment and lets you adjust the shape of individual curved segments. Clicking with the Selection tool () selects the entire path.

7. Click the anchor point (J) that is at the top of the ice cream path to select it. Drag the point down just a bit until it roughly matches the figure.
The points will be filled (not hollow) when selected.


 Tip
You can also press the arrow keys to nudge an anchor point in a direction. Pressing and holding down the Shift key and then pressing an arrow key moves the point ten times farther than pressing the arrow key without the modifier key.

8. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the Layers panel. Click the eye icon () to the left of the layer named "template" to hide its contents. Click the Layers panel tab to hide the panel.

 Note
The template layer was showing again after you chose View > Ice Cream because the visibility of layers is remembered when the view is saved.

9. With the Direct Selection tool, position the pointer over the path, like you see in the figure. Notice that the pointer changes appearance (). This indicates that you can drag the path, which will adjust the anchor points as you drag. Drag the path up and to the left to make the curve a little more rounded. As you drag the path, notice that the direction handles are changing as well. This is an easy way to make edits to a path.


 Tip
As you are dragging a path with the Direct Selection tool, you can also press the Shift key to constrain the handles to a perpendicular direction, which ensures that the handles are the same length.


 Tip
If you wanted to adjust the direction handles instead of dragging the path, and wanted to see the direction handles for all of the selected points, you could click Show Handles For Multiple Selected Anchor Points () in the Control panel.

10. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Deleting and adding anchor points
Most of the time, the goal of drawing paths with a tool like the Pen tool is to avoid adding more anchor points than necessary. You can, however, reduce a path's complexity or change its overall shape by deleting unnecessary points (and therefore gain more control over the shape), or you can extend a path by adding points to it. Next, you will delete and add anchor points to a path.


 Note
If the cherry appears on top of other shapes on the page, select the cherry and then choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back.

1. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the Layers panel. Click the eye icon () to the left of the layer named "cherry" to show its contents (shown in the figure). Click the Layers panel tab to hide the panel.

2. With the Direct Selection tool () selected, click the edge of the ice cream path.
3. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click three times, slowly, on the cherry at the top of the ice cream path to zoom in.
4. Select the Pen tool () in the Tools panel, and position the pointer over the ice cream path (see the figure). When a plus sign (+) appears to the right of the Pen tool pointer (), click to add another point to the path.


 Tip
When you press the Ctrl or Command key with the Pen tool selected, the last selected Selection tool (Selection or Direct Selection) is temporarily selected.

5. Select the Direct Selection tool, and drag the point up until it covers the cherry a bit. You're trying to make it look like the cherry was pushed into the ice cream.
You could have simply selected the Direct Selection tool and dragged the path up, but we wanted to add specific anchor points to the path for later editing.

Next, you'll add another point and reposition it with the Pen tool.
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 over the ice cream path on the left side of the cherry.
7. Choose Select > Deselect.
8. Press the spacebar to temporarily access the Hand tool (). Drag up in the Document window until you see the bottom of the ice cream path, and then release the spacebar.

9. With the Selection tool, select the ice cream path.
10. Select the Pen tool in the Tools panel, and add points to the path on the right and left sides of the drip shape.


 Tip
With an anchor point selected, you can also click Remove Selected Anchor Points () in the Control panel to delete the anchor point.

11. Position the Pen tool pointer over the bottom anchor point on that same drip. When a minus sign (-) appears next to the pointer (), click to delete the anchor point.

12. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Converting between smooth points and corner points
To more precisely control the path you create, you can convert points from smooth points to corner points and from corner points to smooth points, using several methods.

1. Choose 3 Spoon from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. Select the Direct Selection tool (), and position the pointer over the upper-left corner point on the spoon handle. When an open square with a dot in the center () appears next to the pointer, click the anchor point to select it.


 Tip
You could also convert between corner and smooth points by double-clicking an anchor point (or Option-clicking [Mac OS], Alt-clicking [Windows]) with the Curvature tool.

3. With the point selected, click the Convert Selected Anchor Points To Smooth button () in the Control panel.


 Tip
You can also select multiple anchor points and convert them at the same time.


 Note
If you don't drag directly from the end of the direction line, the shape may be deselected. You can click back on the anchor point to try again.

4. Drag the direction handle that's pointing down toward the center of the spoon. It doesn't have to match perfectly, but see the figure for roughly where to drag.

5. Repeat Steps 2-4 for the upper-right anchor point of the spoon handle.


Working with the Anchor Point tool
Next, you'll convert anchor points using the Anchor Point tool ().

1. Choose 2 Dish from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window (if necessary).
2. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the Layers panel. Click the visibility column to the left of the layer named "template" to show its contents.
3. Select the Selection tool in the Tools panel and click the dish path to select it.
4. Position the pointer over the Pen tool (), click and hold down the mouse button to reveal more tools. Select the Anchor Point tool ().
You will also see the Add Anchor Point tool () and the Delete Anchor Point tool (), which are specifically for adding or removing anchor points.

 Tip
If you position the Anchor Point tool pointer over the end of a direction handle that is split, you can press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and when the pointer changes (), click to make the direction handles a single straight line again (not split).

5. Position the pointer over the C anchor point on the left side of the path. When the pointer looks like this , click and drag down. As you drag, press the Shift key. Drag down until the end of the opposite direction handle (that is pointing up) reaches point B (circled in red in the figure). Release the mouse button, and then release the key.


 Note
If the pointer looks like this , don't drag. This means that the pointer is not over the anchor point and if you drag, you will reshape the curve.

With the Anchor Point tool, you can perform tasks like converting between smooth and corner points, edit direction handles, and more.

 Note
If the pointer looks like this () when you click the point, try zooming in to the points and try again. That icon indicates clicking the end of a direction handle.

6. Click point B (left side) to convert the anchor point to a corner point.
This is another way to convert an anchor point between smooth and corner. In order to convert an anchor point to a smooth point with the Anchor Point tool, you need to drag away from the point.

7. Position the pointer over the C anchor point on the right side of the dish path, and when the pointer looks like this , click and drag up. As you drag, press the Shift key. Drag up to snap to point B straight above it (on the right side). Release the mouse button and the release key.

8. Click the upper-right corner point to convert it to a corner point.

9. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Cutting with the Scissors tool
There are several tools that allow you to cut and divide shapes. The Scissors tool () splits a path at an anchor point or on a line segment, and the Knife tool () allows you to cut objects that automatically become closed paths. Next, you'll cut the ice cream dish path with the Scissors tool to reshape it.

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and then choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select the dish path.
2. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn them on.

 Note
If you click the stroke of a closed shape (a circle, for example) with the Scissors tool, it simply cuts the path so that it becomes open (a path with two end points).

3. With the path selected, in the Tools panel, click and hold down the Eraser tool () and select the Scissors tool (). Position the pointer over point E (on the left), and when you see the word "anchor," click to cut the path at that anchor point. Go to the reflected side on the right, and click the same point. See the figure for where to click.

If you don't click directly on the path, you will see a warning dialog box. You can simply click OK and try again. Cuts made with the Scissors tool must be on a line or a curve rather than on an end point. When you click with the Scissors tool, a new anchor point appears and is selected.
4. Choose Select > Deselect.

 Tip
You can press Shift + arrow key (up or down) to move the artwork further.

5. Select the Selection tool, and click the bottom part of the dish path to select it. Press the Down Arrow key six times or so, to move the base down until you see a small gap between the two paths.

6. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select both paths.
7. Press Command+J (Mac OS) or Ctrl+J (Windows) once, and then press Command+J (Mac OS) or Ctrl+J (Windows) again to join the two open paths into one closed path. There should no longer be gaps between the cut paths.


Creating a dashed line
Dashed lines apply to the stroke of an object and can be added to a closed path or an open path. Dashes are created by specifying a sequence of dash lengths and the gaps between them. Next, you'll create a line and add a dash to it.

1. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click twice, slowly, on the top of the cup path to zoom in.
2. Select the Line Segment tool () in the Tools panel, and then choose Select > Deselect.
3. Position the pointer over the left side of the cup path, where the red horizontal dashed line is (see the red X in the figure). Click and drag to the right, and as you drag, press the Shift key. When the pointer reaches the other side of the shape and the word "intersect" displays, release the mouse, and then release the modifier key to create a straight line.

4. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn them off.


 Tip
The Preserves Exact Dash And Gap Lengths button () allows you to retain the appearance of the dashes without aligning to the corners or the dash ends.

5. Click the word "Stroke" in the Control panel to show the Stroke panel. Change the following options in the Stroke panel:
• Weight: 40 pt
• Dashed Line: Selected (By default, this creates a repeating dash pattern of 12 pt dash, 12 pt gap.)
• First Dash value: 5 pt (This creates a 5 pt dash, 5 pt gap repeating pattern.)
• First Gap value: 3 pt (This creates a 5 pt dash, 3 pt gap repeating pattern.)
• Change the next Dash value to 2 pt, and change the next Gap value to 4 pt.
• The values below Dashed Line should now be: 5 pt, 3 pt, 2 pt, 4 pt.
6. With the line still selected, change the Stroke color to the light-yellow swatch named "cup 65%" in the Control panel.

7. Select the Selection tool (), and click to select the cup shape.
8. Change the Stroke weight to 6 pt in the Control panel. Change the fill color to the swatch named "cup" and the stroke color to the brown swatch named "cup stroke."

9. Click the word "Stroke" in the Control panel to reveal the Stroke panel. Click the Align Stroke To Outside button ().

10. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard, and then choose Object > Group.

 Note
If you find you cannot click the Align Stroke To Outside button (it's dimmed), the cup path may not be closed. With the cup path selected, choose Object > Join and try again.


Cutting with the Knife tool
Next, you'll cut the spoon in a straight line with the Knife tool () to create two closed paths.

1. Choose 3 Spoon from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard. Artwork needs to be selected to cut it with the Knife tool.

 Tip
Pressing the Option key (Mac OS) or Alt key (Windows) allows you to cut in a straight line. Pressing the Shift key constrains to 45 degrees.

3. Click and hold down the mouse on the Scissors tool () and select the Knife tool (). Notice the Knife pointer () in the Document window.

 Tip
Pressing the Caps Lock key will turn the Knife tool pointer into a more precise cursor (). This can make it easier to see where the cut will happen.

4. Position the pointer off the left side of the end of the spoon. Press and hold Option+Shift (Mac OS) or Alt+Shift (Windows), and drag all the way across the shape to cut in a straight line. See the figure for where to cut.
If you were to drag across a shape with the Knife tool without pressing a modifier key, you would find that the cut you make is very free-form and not straight at all.

5. Choose Select > Deselect.
6. Select the Selection tool (), and drag the bottom part of the spoon path down a little bit to see that the spoon path is now cut into two closed paths.

7. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard.
8. With the spoon shapes selected, choose Object > Transform > Rotate. In the Rotate dialog box, change the value to -45 and click OK.

9. Choose View > Fit All In Window.

 Note
You may need to collapse the Libraries panel group if it's showing.

10. With the Selection tool, drag the selected spoon shapes onto the ice cream path (see the figure), and choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front.
11. Drag the cup group below the ice cream path and choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back. See the figure for position.
