
12. Click the Layers panel icon () to show the Layers panel, if necessary. Click the eye icon () to the left of the layer named "template" to hide its contents.
13. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Adding arrowheads
You can add arrowheads to both ends of a path using the Stroke panel. There are many different arrowhead styles to choose from in Illustrator, as well as arrowhead editing options. Next, you'll add different arrowheads to a path.

1. Choose the 1 Ice Cream artboard from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, if necessary.
3. Select the Selection tool (), and click the black line below the orange text "THE MONTH."
4. Click the word "Stroke" in the Control panel to open the Stroke panel (or choose Window > Stroke). In the Stroke panel, change the following options:
• Stroke Weight: 50 pt
• Choose Arrow 20 from the menu directly to the right of the word "Arrowheads." This adds an arrowhead to the start (left end) of the line.
• Scale (beneath where you chose Arrow 20): 30%
• Choose Arrow 35 from the arrowheads menu to the far right of the word "Arrowheads." This adds an arrowhead to the end of the line.
• Scale (beneath where you chose Arrow 35): 40%
• Make sure that the Place Arrow Tip At End Of Path button () is selected. The Align options allow you to adjust the path to align to the tip or the end of the arrowhead.

5. Change the Stroke color of the selected path to the swatch named "cup stroke" in the Control panel.
6. Click the larger spoon shape on the ice cream, and choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to send it behind all other shapes.

7. With the Selection tool selected, click the edge of the ice cream shape to select it.
8. Change the fill color to the pink swatch with the tool tip "ice cream," change the stroke color to the swatch with the tool tip "cup stroke" in the Control panel, and change the Stroke weight to 6 pt in the Control panel.
9. Choose Select > Deselect.


Drawing and editing with the Pencil tool
The Pencil tool () lets you draw free-form open and closed paths that contain curves and straight lines. As you draw with the Pencil tool, anchor points are created on the path where necessary and according to the Pencil tool options you set. The path can easily be adjusted when the path is complete.

Next, you will draw and edit a few paths using the Pencil tool.

 Tip
To draw a new path near the original without editing the original, you could double-click the Pencil tool to open the Pencil Tool Options dialog box. Deselect Edit Selected Paths, click OK, and then draw the new path.

1. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel and click several times, slowly, on the bottom of the pink ice cream shape to zoom in.


 Tip
When it comes to the Fidelity value, dragging the slider closer to Accurate usually creates more anchor points and more accurately reflects the path you've drawn. Dragging the slider toward Smooth makes fewer anchor points and a smoother, less complex path.

2. Double-click the Pencil tool () in the Tools panel. In the Pencil Tool Options dialog box, set the following options, leaving the rest at their default settings:
• Drag the Fidelity slider all the way to the right to Smooth. This will reduce the number of points on a path drawn with the Pencil tool and make the path smoother.
• Fill New Pencil Strokes: Selected (Without this option selected, which is the default, paths you draw will have no fill.)
• Alt Key (Option key on Mac OS) Toggles To Smooth Tool: Selected (The Smooth tool is used to smooth the path after it is drawn.)
3. Click OK.
4. With the Pencil tool selected, position the pointer beneath the ice cream shape.

 Note
If you see a crosshair () instead of the Pencil icon (), the Caps Lock key is active. Caps Lock turns tool icons into crosshairs for increased precision.

The asterisk (*) that appears next to the pointer indicates that you are about to create a new path. If you don't see the asterisk, it means that you are about to redraw a shape that the pointer is near.

5. Draw a "drip" shape beneath the ice cream shape (see the figure for what to draw). When the pointer gets close to the start of the path, a small circle displays next to it () to indicate that if you release the mouse button, the path will close. When you see the circle, release the mouse button to close the path.
Notice that as you are drawing, the path may not look perfectly smooth. After releasing the mouse button, the path is smoothed based on the Fidelity value that you set in the Pencil Tool Options dialog box.
6. With the new path still selected, position the Pencil tool over the bottom of the path and notice that the asterisk (*) disappears from the pointer, indicating that you are about to redraw the selected path. Try redrawing the drip. Make sure to start on the drip path and end on the drip path.


 Tip
You may find that it redraws the entire "drip" instead of editing it. You can zoom in to redraw a part of the path.

7. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and the pointer will change to a circle. With the key held down, drag across the bottom of the drip shape, following loosely along the path, to smooth it. Release the key when done smoothing. You can try this a few times.

We selected the Alt Key (Option key on Mac OS) Toggles To Smooth Tool option in the Pencil Tool Options dialog box earlier. Rather than redrawing the path, it is simply smoothing it out with the modifier key held down.

8. Draw a "U" shape beneath the first drip shape, without closing it.
9. Click and hold down the mouse on the Pencil tool () and select the Join tool ().
You can use the Join tool () to intelligently join paths that cross, overlap, or have open ends without affecting the original paths.
Unlike the Join command (Object > Path > Join), you learned about in Lesson 3, the Join tool can trim overlapping paths as it joins and it doesn't simply create a straight line between the anchor points you are joining. The angle created by the two paths to be joined are taken into account.
10. With the Join tool selected, drag across the two ends of the "U" shaped path you created to join them.

When dragging (also called scrubbing) across paths, they will be either "extended and joined" or "trimmed and joined." In this example, the paths were extended and joined. The Join tool works on paths that are selected or not, but the result of joining is not selected, to continue working on more paths.
Aside from drawing more free-form paths, you can also create straight lines with the Pencil tool.
11. Click and hold down the mouse on the Join tool () and select the Pencil tool (). Double-click the Pencil tool. In the Pencil Tool Options dialog box, deselect Fill New Pencil Strokes and click OK. This way you can draw a path with no fill.
12. Position the pointer above the end of the spoon that is sticking out of the ice cream shape (see red X in the following figure).
You are going to draw a shape with a flat side. Don't forget, you can always choose Edit > Undo Pencil and try again.

 Tip
You can also press Option+Shift (Mac OS) or Alt+Shift (Windows) as you draw with the Pencil tool to create a straight line that is constrained to 45°. If you press the Shift key before you start drawing a path with the Pencil tool, you can draw a straight line that is constrained to 45°.

13. Click and drag a small curve to the flat edge of the spoon shape. Without releasing the mouse button, press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and drag a straight line that follows the flat edge of the spoon shape. Without releasing the mouse button, release the Option/Alt key and continue dragging to complete the shape as shown in the figure.

14. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

15. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.

Review questions
1. Describe how to draw straight vertical, horizontal, or diagonal lines using the Pen tool ().

2. How do you draw a curved line using the Pen tool?
3. How do you draw a corner point on a curved line?
4. Name two ways to convert a smooth point on a curve to a corner point.
5. Which tool would you use to edit a segment on a curved line?
6. How can you change the way the Pencil tool () works?

Review answers
1. To draw a straight line, click with the Pen tool () and then move the pointer and click again. The first click sets the starting anchor point, and the second click sets the ending anchor point of the line. To constrain the straight line vertically, horizontally, or along a 45° diagonal, press the Shift key as you click to create the second anchor point with the Pen tool.

2. To draw a curved line with the Pen tool, click to create the starting anchor point, drag to set the direction of the curve, and then click to end the curve.
3. To draw a corner point on a curved line, press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and drag the direction handle on the end point of the curve to change the direction of the path. Continue dragging to draw the next curved segment on the path.
4. To convert a smooth point on a curve to a corner point, use the Direct Selection tool () to select the anchor point, and then use the Anchor Point tool () to drag a direction handle to change the direction. Another method is to choose a point or points with the Direct Selection tool, and then click the Convert Selected Anchor Points To Corner button () in the Control panel.
5. To edit a segment on a curved line, select the Direct Selection tool and drag the segment to move it, or drag a direction handle on an anchor point to adjust the length and shape of the segment. Dragging a path segment with the Direct Selection tool or pressing the Option/Alt key and dragging a path segment with the Pen tool is another way to reshape a path.
6. To change the way the Pencil tool () works, double-click the Pencil tool in the Tools panel to open the Pencil Tool Options dialog box. There you can change the smoothness, fidelity, and other options.







6. Using Color and Patterns to Enhance Signage

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Understand color modes and the main color controls.
• Create, edit, and paint with colors using a variety of methods.
• Name and save colors, and build a color palette.
• Work with color groups.
• Use the Color Guide panel and the Edit Colors/Recolor Artwork features.
• Copy paint and appearance attributes from one object to another.
• Create and paint with patterns.
• Work with Live Paint.

This lesson takes approximately 90 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



Spice up your illustrations with colors by taking advantage of color controls in Adobe Illustrator CC. In this information-packed lesson, you'll discover how to create and paint fills and strokes, use the Color Guide panel for inspiration, work with color groups, recolor artwork, create patterns, and more.


Getting started
In this lesson, you will learn about the fundamentals of color and create and edit colors for a park sign and logo, using the Color panel, Swatches panel, and more.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of the book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Choose File > Open, and open the L6_end.ai file in the Lesson06 folder, located in the Lessons folder, to view a final version of the park sign you will paint.

4. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
Leave the L6_end.ai file open for reference.
5. Choose File > Open. In the Open dialog box, navigate to the Lesson06 folder in the Lessons folder. Open the L6_start.ai file. This file has all of the pieces already in it; they just need to be painted.


 Note
In Mac OS, when opening lesson files, you may need to click the round, green button in the upper-left corner of the Document window to maximize the window's size.

6. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the Lesson06 folder and name it ParkSign.ai. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or the Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the options at their default settings, and then click OK.
7. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.


Understanding color
There are many ways to experiment with and apply color to your artwork in Adobe Illustrator CC. As you work with color, it's important to keep in mind the medium in which the artwork will be published, such as a print piece or a website. The colors you create need to be described in the correct way for the medium. This usually requires that you use the correct color mode and color definitions for your colors. The first part, color modes, will be described next.


Exploring color modes
Before starting a new illustration, you should decide which color mode the artwork should use, CMYK or RGB.

• CMYK—Cyan, magenta, yellow, and black are the colors used in four-color process printing. These four colors are combined and overlapped in a screen pattern to create a multitude of other colors. Select this mode for printing (in the New Document dialog box or the File > Document Color Mode menu).
• RGB—Red, green, and blue light are added together in various ways to create an array of colors. Select this mode if you are using images for onscreen presentations or the Internet.

 Tip
To learn more about color and graphics, search for "About color" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

When creating a new document, you select a color mode by choosing File > New and picking the appropriate profile, such as Print, which uses CMYK for the color mode. You can change the color mode by clicking the arrow to the left of Advanced and making a selection in the Color Mode menu.

When a color mode is selected, the applicable panels open, displaying colors in the selected color mode. You can change the color mode of a document, after a file is created, by choosing File > Document Color Mode, and then selecting either CMYK Color or RGB Color in the menu.

Understanding the main color controls
In this lesson, you will learn about the traditional methods of coloring (also called painting) objects in Illustrator. This includes painting objects with colors and patterns using a combination of panels and tools, such as the Control panel, Color panel, Swatches panel, Color Guide panel, Color Picker, and the paint options in the Tools panel.

You'll begin by exploring some of more widely used options available for creating and applying color.
1. Click the L6_end.ai document tab at the top of the Document window.
2. Choose 1 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
3. Select the Selection tool (), and click the large, light-brown shape in the sign behind the text "SHORELINE PARK."

 Note
Depending on your screen resolution, your Tools panel may either be a double or single column.

Objects in Illustrator can have a fill, a stroke, or both, as you've seen. At the bottom of the Tools panel, notice the Fill and Stroke boxes. The Fill box is brown for the selected object, and the Stroke box is None. Click the Stroke box, and then click the Fill box (making sure that the Fill box is the last selected). Notice that the box you click is brought to the front of the other. When a color is selected, it will apply to the fill or stroke of the selected object (whichever is in front).


A. Fill boxB. Default Fill And Stroke buttonC. Color buttonD. Gradient buttonE. None buttonF. Stroke boxG. Swap Fill And Stroke button

4. Click the Color panel icon () on the right side of the workspace, if it isn't open already. Click the double arrow to the left of the word "Color" in the panel tab until the panel looks like the figure below.

 Tip
You can Shift-click the color spectrum bar at the bottom of the Color panel to rotate through different color modes, such as CMYK and RGB, or click the panel menu icon () and choose a color mode.

The Color panel displays the current fill and stroke of the selected content. The CMYK sliders in the Color panel show the percentages of cyan, magenta, yellow, and black used to create the selected color. The color spectrum bar at the bottom lets you quickly and visually select a fill or stroke color from a spectrum of colors.


A. Default Fill And Stroke buttonB. Fill boxC. Stroke boxD. None boxE. Color valueF. Color sliderG. Color spectrum barH. Drag to expand the color spectrum

5. Click the Swatches panel icon () on the right side of the workspace.
You can name and save different types of colors, gradients, and patterns in the Swatches panel as swatches so that you can apply and edit them later. Swatches are listed in the Swatches panel in the order in which they were created, but you can reorder or organize the swatches into groups to suit your needs. All documents start with a set number of swatches, but any colors in the Swatches panel are available to the current document only (by default), since each document has its own defined swatches.


A. Fill and Stroke boxesB. SwatchC. Color groupD. Swatch Libraries menuE. Open Color Themes panelF. Libraries panelG. Show Swatch Kinds menuH. Swatch optionsI. New Color groupJ. New SwatchK. Delete SwatchL. List or Thumbnail view

6. Click the Color Guide panel icon () on the right side of the workspace. Click the brown swatch in the upper-left corner of the panel to set the base color (labeled "A" in the figure below).
The Color Guide panel can provide color inspiration while you create your artwork. Either starting with the current color in the Fill box or by using an existing library of colors, it can help you pick color tints, analogous colors, and more. Those colors can then be applied directly to artwork using various methods, saved as swatches, or within groups, or edited using the Edit Colors feature.


A. Set base color to the current colorB. Color variationsC. Limits the color group to colors in a swatch libraryD. Edit Or Apply Colors buttonE. Save Color Group to Swatch panelF. Harmony Rules menu and active color group

7. Click the Color panel icon (). Using the Selection tool, click various shapes in the L6_end.ai file to see how their paint attributes are reflected in the Color panel and the Tools panel.
8. Leave the L6_end.ai file open for reference, or choose File > Close to close it without saving your changes (we closed it).

Working with color
As you will see in this section, Illustrator provides a lot of ways to arrive at the color you need. You'll start by applying an existing color to a shape, and then work your way through the most widely used ways to create and apply color.


 Note
Throughout this lesson, you'll be working on a document with a color mode that was set to CMYK when the document was created, which means that the majority of colors you create will, by default, be composed of cyan, magenta, yellow, and black.


Applying an existing color
As was mentioned previously, every new document in Illustrator has a series of default colors available for you to use in your artwork in the form of swatches in the Swatches panel. The first method of working with color you will explore is to paint a shape with an existing color.

1. Click the ParkSign.ai document tab at the top of the Document window, if you did not close the L6_end.ai document.
2. Choose 1 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window (if it's not chosen already), and then choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
3. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.
4. With the Selection tool (), click to select the large red shape.
5. Click the Fill color in the Control panel, and the Swatches panel appears. Position the pointer over swatches in the list to reveal a tool tip with the swatch name. Click to apply the swatch named "Sign Bg." Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.

6. Choose Select > Deselect to ensure that nothing is selected.

Creating and saving a custom color as a swatch
At times, you may also need to create a custom color and save it for later use. Next, you'll create a color using the Color panel, and then you'll save that color as a swatch in the Swatches panel.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the white bar above the green bar, in the middle of the artboard (on the sign).

 Note
If the Color panel doesn't look like the following figure, choose Show Options from the Color panel menu.

2. If the Color panel is not visible, click the Color panel icon (). Click the Color panel menu icon () and choose CMYK from the menu (if it's not already selected).
3. In the Color panel, click the white Fill box (if it's not selected) to apply the color to the fill of the selected shape. Drag the bottom of the Color panel down to reveal more of the color spectrum bar. Click in the light-green part of the color spectrum to sample a light-green color and apply it to the fill.

If artwork is selected when you create a color in the Color panel, the color is automatically applied.

 Tip
Each CMYK value is a percentage of 100.

4. Type the following values in the CMYK text fields: C=42, M=0, Y=62, K=0. This ensures that we are all using the same light-green color.
Now that you've created a color, you can save it as a swatch in the Swatches panel so that later you can edit or apply it elsewhere in this document.

5. Click the Swatches panel icon (), and click the New Swatch button () at the bottom of the panel to create a swatch from the color you just created.


 Tip
Naming colors can be an art form. You can name them according to their value (C=45, ...), appearance (Light Green), or a descriptive name like "text header," among other attributes.

6. In the New Swatch dialog box, name the color Light Green and, leaving the rest of the options as they are, click OK.
Notice that the new Light Green swatch is highlighted in the Swatches panel (it has a white border around it). That's because it is applied to the selected shape automatically. You may need to scroll in the Swatches panel to see it.

7. With the Selection tool, select the third white tree from the left, on the top of the sign (see the following figure).
8. In the Swatches panel on the right, drag the bottom of the panel down to see more swatches. Ensure that the Fill box at the top of the panel is selected to paint the fill of the shape, and select the swatch named "Light Green" to apply it.

When applying a swatch from the Swatches panel, it's always important to select the stroke or the fill first so that it paints the right part.
9. Click the Stroke box at the top of the Swatches panel to paint the stroke of the selected shape. Select the None swatch () in the Swatches panel to remove the stroke.

10. Choose Select > Deselect.

Creating a copy of a swatch
Next, you will create another swatch by copying and editing the Light Green swatch you made.

1. Click the Fill box at the top of the Swatches panel. This selects the Light Green swatch in the Swatches panel.
2. Click the New Swatch button () at the bottom of the Swatches panel.
Clicking the New Swatch button creates a swatch from the fill or stroke color (whichever is active or up front at the top of the Swatches panel). If the None swatch is applied, you won't be able to click the New Swatch button (it'll be dimmed).
3. In the New Swatch dialog box, change the name to Orange and change the values to C=15, M=45, Y=70, K=0. Click OK.

 Note
If the tree shape had still been selected, it would be filled with the new color.


 Tip
In the New Swatch dialog box, the Color Mode menu lets you change the color mode of a specific color to RGB, CMYK, Grayscale, or another mode, when you create it.

4. With the Selection tool (), click the white bar above the Light Green-filled bar to select it. Click the Fill color in the Control panel, and click to select the color named "Orange."


Editing a swatch
After a color is created and saved in the Swatches panel, you can later edit that color if you need to. Next, you will edit the orange swatch that you created.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the large brown sign shape you first applied a fill color to.
2. Make sure that the Fill box is selected in the Swatches panel, and then double-click the swatch named "Sign Bg" in the Swatches panel. In the Swatch Options dialog box, change the K value to 0, select Preview to see the change, and then click OK.

When you edit a swatch you created, if you want that edit to apply to other objects with that swatch color, they need to be selected. Otherwise, editing the swatch will not update the colored objects by default.

Creating and editing a global swatch
Next, you will create a color and make it a global color. When you edit a global color, all artwork with that swatch applied, regardless of whether it's selected, is updated.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the white bar above the orange bar.
2. In the Swatches panel, click the New Swatch button () at the bottom of the panel. In the New Swatch dialog box, change the following options:
• Swatch Name: Forest Green
• Global: Selected
• Change the CMYK values to C=91, M=49, Y=49, K=0

3. Click OK.
In the Swatches panel, notice that the new swatch is in the top row of colors, to the right of the white swatch. When you selected the shape, it was filled with white, so the white swatch was selected in the panel. When you click the New Swatch button to make a new color, it duplicates the selected swatch and puts the new swatch next to the original.
4. Click and drag the Forest Green swatch to the right of the Orange swatch to keep them together.
As you interact with the Forest Green swatch, notice the little white triangle in the lower-right corner. This indicates that it's a global swatch.

5. With the Selection tool, click the second white tree from the left (see the figure below). Make sure the Fill box is selected (active) in the Swatches panel and apply the new "Forest Green" swatch to the fill.

6. Change the Stroke weight in the Control panel to 0 by either typing in the value or by clicking the down arrow to remove it.
7. Choose Select > Deselect.
Now you'll see the power of a global swatch.
8. In the Swatches panel, double-click the "Forest Green" swatch. In the Swatch Options dialog box, change the K value to 24, select Preview to see the changes (you may need to click in another field to see the change), and then click OK.
All of the shapes with the global swatch applied are updated, even though they weren't selected.


 Note
You can change an existing swatch into a global swatch, but it requires a bit more effort. You either need to select all of the shapes with that swatch applied before you edit the swatch and make it global, or you edit the swatch to make it global and then reapply the swatch to the content.


Using the Color Picker to create color
Another method for creating color is to use the Color Picker. The Color Picker lets you select color in a color field and in a spectrum by either defining colors numerically or by clicking a swatch, and it is found in other Adobe applications like InDesign and Photoshop. Next, you will create a color using the Color Picker and then save the color as a swatch in the Swatches panel.

1. With the Selection tool (), click the bottom white bar on the sign.

 Tip
You can also double-click the Fill box (or Stroke box) in the Color panel or at the bottom of the Tools panel to access the Color Picker.

2. Double-click the Fill box at the top of the Swatches panel to open the Color Picker.

In the Color Picker dialog box, the larger color field shows saturation (horizontally) and brightness (vertically) and is labeled "A" in the figure below. The color spectrum bar (labeled "B" in the figure) shows the hue.

 Tip
You can also change the color spectrum you see by selecting H, S, B, R, G, or B.

3. In the Color Picker dialog box, click and drag in the color spectrum bar up and down to change the color range. Make sure that you wind up with the triangles in an orange/brown hue (it doesn't have to be exact).
4. Click and drag in the color field. As you drag right and left, you adjust the saturation, and as you drag up and down, you adjust the brightness. The color you create when you click OK (don't yet) appears in the New color rectangle, labeled "C" in the figure. Don't worry about matching the color in the figure yet.

5. In the CMYK text fields, change the values to: C=40, M=65, Y=90, and K=33. Click OK.

 Note
The Color Swatches button in the Color Picker shows you the swatches in the Swatches panel and the default color books (the sets of swatches that come with Illustrator), and it lets you select a color from one. You can return to the color spectrum by clicking the Color Models button and then editing the swatch color values, if necessary.

Next, you'll save the brown color that is applied to the bar as a swatch.
6. In the Swatches panel, click the New Swatch button () at the bottom of the panel, and name the color Dark Brown in the New Swatch dialog box. Select Global, and then click OK to see the color appear as a swatch in the Swatches panel.
7. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Using Illustrator swatch libraries
Swatch libraries are collections of preset colors, such as Pantone and TOYO, and thematic libraries, such as Earthtone and Ice Cream. Illustrator has default swatch libraries that appear as separate panels when you open them, and these cannot be edited. When you apply color from a library to artwork, the color in the library becomes a swatch that is saved in that document only and appears in the Swatches panel. Libraries are a great starting point for creating colors.

Next, you will create a spot color, which prints using a spot ink, using a Pantone Plus library. You will then apply that color to a logo. When color is defined in Illustrator and later printed, the appearance of the color could vary. This is why most printers and designers rely on a color-matching system, like the PANTONE system, to help maintain color consistency and, in some cases, to give a wider range of colors.

 Note
Sometimes it's practical to use process (typically CMYK) and spot inks (PANTONE, for instance) in the same job. For example, you might use one spot ink to print the exact color of a company logo on the same pages of an annual report where photographs are reproduced using process color. You can also use a spot-color printing plate to apply a varnish over areas of a process color job. In both cases, your print job would use a total of five inks—four process inks and one spot ink or varnish.


Creating a spot color
In this section, you will see how to load a color library, such as the PANTONE color system, and how to add a PANTONE MATCHING SYSTEM (PMS) color to the Swatches panel.

1. In the Swatches panel, click the Swatch Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the panel. Choose Color Books > PANTONE+ Solid Coated.
The PANTONE+ Solid Coated library appears in its own panel.
2. Type 755 in the Find field. As you type, the list is filtered, showing a smaller and smaller range of swatches. Type another 5 so that 7555 appears in the search field.
3. Click the swatch beneath the search field to add it to the Swatches panel. Click the X to the right of the search field to stop the filtering.
4. Close the PANTONE+ Solid Coated panel.


 Note
When you exit Illustrator with the PANTONE library panel still open and then relaunch Illustrator, the panel does not reopen. To automatically open the panel whenever Illustrator opens, choose Persistent from the PANTONE+ Solid Coated panel menu ().

5. Choose 2 Artboard 2 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
6. With the Selection tool (), click the first white-filled tree shape on the left. Make sure the Fill box is selected (active) in the Swatches panel and select the "PANTONE 7555 C" swatch to fill the shape.


 Tip
Now that you know a number of ways to apply a fill and stroke (the Swatches panel and Control panel), you can use either of those methods to apply color swatches going forward.

7. Change the Stroke weight to 0 in the Control panel.
8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

PANTONE swatches vs. other swatches in the Swatches panel
In the Swatches panel, you can identify spot-color swatches by the spot-color icon () when the panel is in List view, or by the dot in the lower corner () when the panel is in Thumbnail view. Process colors do not have a spot-color icon or a dot. To learn more about color libraries and spot colors, search for "About color" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).


Creating and saving a tint of a color
A tint is a mixture of a color with white to make the color lighter. You can create a tint from a global process color, like CMYK, or from a spot color.

Next, you will create a tint of the Pantone swatch.
1. With the Selection tool (), click the white tree shape just to the right of the tree shape filled with the Pantone color.
2. In the Swatches panel, apply the new Pantone color to the fill of the shape.

 Note
Don't forget, you need to make sure that the Fill box is selected in the Swatches panel to apply the color to the fill! Also, the Fill and Stroke boxes in the Tools panel, Color panel, and Swatches panel are linked together. When you change one, they all change.

3. Click the Color panel icon () to expand the Color panel. Make sure that the Fill box is selected in the Color panel, and then drag the tint slider to the left to change the tint value to 70%.

 Note
You may need to choose Show Options from the Color panel menu to see the slider.

4. Click the Swatches panel icon () on the right side of the workspace. Click the New Swatch button () at the bottom of the panel to save the tint. Notice the tint swatch in the Swatches panel. Position the pointer over the swatch icon to see its name, PANTONE 7555 C 70%.

5. Change the Stroke weight to 0 in the Control panel for the selected tree shape.
6. For the remaining three tree shapes, apply the "PANTONE 7555 C" swatch, the tint swatch (PANTONE 7555 C 70%), and then the "PANTONE 7555 C" swatch to their fills, in that order.
7. Change the Stroke weight to 0 for each of the tree shapes.

8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Adjusting colors
When working with colors, Illustrator offers an Edit Colors menu option (Edit > Edit Colors) that allows you to convert colors between color modes, blend colors, invert colors, and much more, for selected artwork. Next, you will change the trees logo with the PANTONE 7555 C color applied to use CMYK colors instead of Pantone.

1. While still on Artboard 2, choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select all of the shapes with the Pantone color and tint applied.
2. Choose Edit > Edit Colors > Convert To CMYK.
The colors in the selected shapes are now composed of CMYK. Using this method for converting to CMYK does not affect the Pantone color swatches in the Swatches panel. It simply converts the selected artwork colors to CMYK. The swatches in the Swatches panel are no longer applied to the artwork.

 Note
Currently, Convert to RGB in the Edit Color menu is dimmed (you cannot select it). That's because the Document Color Mode is CMYK. To convert selected content color to RGB using this method, choose File > Document Color Mode > RGB Color.


Copying appearance attributes
At times you may want to simply copy appearance attributes, like character or paragraph formatting, fill, and stroke, from one object to another. This can be done with the Eyedropper tool () and can really speed up your creative process.

1. Choose 1 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window to return to the artboard with the sign on it.
2. Using the Selection tool (), select the first white tree (on the left) at the top of the sign (the one with the stroke applied).

 Tip
You can double-click the Eyedropper tool in the Tools panel, before sampling, to change the attributes that the Eyedropper picks up and applies.

3. Select the Eyedropper tool () in the Tools panel. Click the green bar just above the bottom brown bar (see the figure).
The tree has the attributes from the painted bar applied, including a cream-colored stroke.

4. Click the Stroke color in the Control panel, and change the color to None ().
5. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Creating a color group
In Illustrator, you can save colors in color groups, which consist of related color swatches in the Swatches panel. Organizing colors by their use, such as grouping all colors for a logo, can be helpful for organization and more, as you'll soon see. Color groups cannot contain patterns, gradients, the None color, or Registration color.

Next, you will create a color group of some of the swatches you've created for the logo to keep them organized.
1. In the Swatches panel, click the swatch named "Aqua" to select it. Holding down the Shift key, click the swatch named "Forest Green" to the right to select five color swatches.
2. Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) the orange swatch to remove it from the selection.

 Note
If objects are selected when you click the New Color Group button, an expanded New Color Group dialog box appears. In this dialog box, you can create a color group from the colors in the artwork and convert the colors to global colors.

3. Click the New Color Group button () at the bottom of the Swatches panel. Change the Name to Tree Logo in the New Color Group dialog box, and click OK to save the group.

4. With the Selection tool () selected, click a blank area of the Swatches panel to deselect the color group you just created.
Each swatch in a color group can still be edited independently by double-clicking a swatch in the group and editing the values in the Swatch Options dialog box.
For the next step, you may want to drag the bottom of the Swatches panel down like we did, so that you can see all of the swatches in the panel.
5. Click the white swatch in the top row of the Swatches panel, and drag it to the right of the "Forest Green" swatch in the tree logo color group.
When dragging a color into a color group, make sure that you see a line appear on the right edge of the "Forest Green" swatch (see the figure). Otherwise, you may drag the white swatch to the wrong place. You can always choose Edit > Undo Move Swatches and try again. Aside from dragging colors in or out of a color group, you can rename a color group, reorder the colors in the group, and more.


Working with color in the Color Guide panel
The Color Guide panel can provide you with color inspiration as you create your artwork. You can use it to pick color tints, analogous colors, and much more, and then apply them directly to artwork, edit them using several methods, or save them as a group in the Swatches panel.

Next, you will use the Color Guide panel to select different colors for a version of a tree logo, and then you'll save those colors as a color group in the Swatches panel.
1. Choose 3 Artboard 3 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. With the Selection tool (), click the first tree on the left (with the aqua color fill). Make sure that the Fill box is selected in the Tools panel or Swatches panel.
3. Click the Color Guide panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to open the panel. Click the Set Base Color To The Current Color button () (see the following figure).

 Note
The colors you see in the Color Guide panel may differ from what you see in the figure. That's okay.

This allows the Color Guide panel to suggest colors based on the color showing in the Set Base Color To The Current Color button.

 Tip
You can also choose a different color variation (different from the default Tints/Shades), such as "Show Warm/Cool," by clicking the Color Guide panel menu icon () and choosing one.

Next, you'll experiment with colors using Harmony Rules.
4. Choose Analogous from the Harmony Rules menu (circled in the figure) in the Color Guide panel.
A base group of colors is created to the right of the base color (aqua), and a series of tints and shades of those colors appears in the body of the panel.

There are lots of harmony rules to choose from, each instantly generating a color scheme based on any color you want. The base color you set (aqua) is the basis for generating the colors in the color scheme.
5. Click the Save Color Group To Swatch Panel button () at the bottom of the Color Guide panel to save the base colors (the five colors at the top) in the Swatches panel as a group.
6. Click the Swatches panel icon (). Scroll down to see the new group added.

Next, you'll experiment with the colors in the color group that you just created to create an alternate group of colors.
7. Choose Select > Deselect.
8. Click the Color Guide panel icon () to open the Color Guide panel.


 Note
If you choose a different color variation than the one suggested, your color will differ from those in the rest of this section.

9. In the list of swatches in the Color Guide panel, select the fifth color from the left, in the third row (see the figure).
If the tree were still selected, it would have been filled with the blue. You can apply or save any of the colors in the Color Guide panel as an individual swatch.
10. Click the Set Base Color To The Current Color button () (circled in the figure below) to ensure that all colors that the panel creates are based on that same blue.
11. Choose Complementary 2 from the Harmony Rules menu.
12. Click the Save Color Group To Swatch Panel button () to save the colors as a group in the Swatches panel.

13. Choose File > Save.

Editing a color group in the Edit Colors dialog box
When you create color groups in the Swatches panel or in the Color Guide panel, you can edit the swatches in the group either individually from the Swatches panel, or together. In this section, you will learn how to edit the colors of a color group in the Swatches panel using the Edit Color dialog box. Later, you will apply those colors to a version of the logo.

1. Choose Select > Deselect (if it's available), and then click the Swatches panel icon () to show the panel.
Deselecting right now is important! If artwork is selected when you edit the color group, the edits can apply to the selected artwork.
2. Click the Color Group icon () to the left of the colors in the bottom color group (the one you just saved) to select the group.

3. Click the Edit Color Group button () at the bottom of the Swatches panel to open the Edit Colors dialog box.

 Tip
With no artwork selected, you could also double-click the Color Group icon (the folder) to open the Edit Colors dialog box.

The Edit Color Group button appears in multiple locations, like the Swatches and Color Guide panels. The Edit Colors dialog box allows you to edit a group of colors in various ways or even to create new color groups. On the right side of the Edit Colors dialog box, under the "Color Groups" section, all of the existing color groups in the Swatches panel are listed.
4. Select the name "Color Group 2" above the Color Groups if not already selected, on the right side of the dialog box (circled in the figure), and rename the group Logo 2. This is one way you can rename a color group.
Next, you will make a few changes to the colors in the "Logo 2" group. On the left side of the Edit Colors dialog box, you can edit the colors of each color group, either individually or together, and edit them visually or precisely using specific color values. In the color wheel, you'll see markers (circles) that represent each color in the selected group.

5. In the color wheel on the left side of the dialog box, drag the largest blue circle, called a marker, in the lower-left section of the color wheel, down and to the right just a little bit. The largest marker is the base color of the color group that you set in the Color Guide panel initially.


 Tip
You'll notice that all of the colors in the group move and change together. This is because they are linked together by default.

Moving the color markers away from the center of the color wheel increases saturation, and moving them toward the center decreases saturation. Moving a color marker around the color wheel (clockwise or counterclockwise) edits the hue.
6. Drag the Adjust Brightness slider below the color wheel to the right, to brighten all the colors at once.

 Note
You can match the H, S, B (hue, saturation, brightness) values below the color wheel in the Edit Colors dialog box to mimic what you see in the figure, if you want to match exactly the color we achieved.

Next, you will edit the colors in the group independently, and then save the colors as a new named group.

7. Click the Unlink Harmony Colors button () in the Edit Colors dialog box to edit the colors independently.
The lines between the color markers (circles) and the center of the color wheel become dotted, indicating that you can edit the colors independently.

Next, you will edit just one of the colors, since they are now unlinked, and you will edit that color by using specific color values rather than by dragging the color in the color wheel.
8. Click the Color Mode icon () to the right of the H, S, B values below the color wheel, and choose CMYK from the menu, if the CMYK sliders are not already visible.

9. Click to select the lightest orange marker in the color wheel, as shown in the figure. Change the CMYK values to C=10, M=50, Y=100, and K=0. Notice that the marker has moved in the color wheel, and it's the only one that moved. Leave the dialog box open.


 Note
It's okay if the color markers in your Edit Colors dialog box are different from those shown in the figure.

10. Click the Save Changes To Color Group button () in the upper-right corner of the Edit Colors dialog box to save the changes to the color group.
If you decide to make changes to colors in another color group, you can select the color group you want to edit on the right side of the Edit Colors dialog box and edit the colors on the left side. You can then save the changes to the group by clicking the Save Changes To Color Group button () in the upper-right corner of the dialog box.

11. Click OK to close the Edit Colors dialog box.
The subtle changes to the colors in the group should show in the Swatches panel.

 Note
If a dialog box appears after clicking OK, click Yes to save the changes to the color group in the Swatches panel.

12. Choose File > Save.

Editing colors in artwork
You can also edit the colors in selected artwork using the Recolor Artwork command. It's really useful when global swatches weren't used in the artwork. Without using global colors in your artwork, updating a series of colors in selected artwork may take a lot of time.

Next, you will edit the colors for one of the logos that was created with colors that were not saved in the Swatches panel.
1. Choose 4 Artboard 4 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select all of the artwork.
3. Click the Recolor Artwork button () in the Control panel to open the Recolor Artwork dialog box.

 Tip
You can also access the Recolor Artwork dialog box by selecting the artwork, and then choosing Edit > Edit Colors > Recolor Artwork.

The Recolor Artwork dialog box options allow you to edit, reassign, or reduce the colors in your selected artwork and to create and edit color groups. You'll probably notice that it looks an awful lot like the Edit Colors dialog box. The big difference is that instead of editing color and creating color groups to apply later, you are dynamically editing colors in the selected artwork.
4. In the Recolor Artwork dialog box, click the Hide Color Group Storage icon () on the right side of the dialog box.
Like in the Edit Colors dialog box, all of the color groups in the Swatches panel appear on the right side of the Recolor Artwork dialog box (in the Color Groups storage area). In the Recolor Artwork dialog box, you can apply colors from these color groups to the selected artwork.

5. Click the Edit tab to edit the colors in the artwork using the color wheel.
6. Make sure that the Link Harmony Colors icon () is showing so that you can edit all of the colors independently.
The lines between the color markers (circles) and the center of the color wheel should be dotted. If it looks like this (), click it to unlink.
When you created a color group, you worked with the color wheel and the CMYK sliders to edit color. This time, you will adjust color using a different method.
7. Click the Display Color Bars button () to show the colors in the selected artwork as bars. Click the cream color bar to select it.
8. At the bottom of the dialog box, change the CMYK values to C=5, M=10, Y=40, K=0. If the Recolor Artwork dialog box isn't in the way, you should see the artwork changing.

 Tip
If you want to return to the original logo colors, click the Get Colors From Selected Art button ().

9. Click the green color bar to select it instead of the cream color bar. With the pointer over the green color bar, right-click and choose Select Shade from the menu that appears. Click in the shade menu, and drag to change the color of the color bar.
Editing the colors as bars is just another way to view and edit the colors, and there are so many options for editing. To learn more about these options, search for "Color groups (harmonies)" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

10. Click OK in the Recolor Artwork dialog box.


 Tip
You can save the edited colors as a color group by clicking the Show Color Group Storage icon () on the right side of the dialog box, and then clicking the New Color Group button ().

11. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

 Note
When this book was written, the website was kuler.adobe.com.


Working with Adobe Color Themes
The Color Themes panel (Window > Color Themes) displays color themes you have created and synced with your account on the Adobe Color website (kuler.adobe.com). The Adobe ID used in Illustrator CC is automatically used to sign in to the Adobe Color website, and the Color Themes panel is refreshed with your Adobe Color themes. For more information about working with the Color Themes panel, search for "Color themes" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).



Assigning colors to your artwork
As you've seen, clicking the Recolor Artwork button () with artwork selected opens the Recolor Artwork dialog box. In the Recolor Artwork dialog box, you can edit colors in existing artwork, as you've seen, but you can also "assign" colors from an existing color group to your artwork. Next, you will assign a color group to create a version of the logo.

1. Choose 3 Artboard 3 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select the logo trees.
3. Click the Recolor Artwork button () in the Control panel.
4. Click the Show Color Group Storage icon () (the small arrow) on the right side of the dialog box to show the color groups, if they aren't already showing. Make sure that, in the top left of the dialog box, the Assign button is selected.
On the left side of the Recolor Artwork dialog box, notice that the five colors of the selected logo are listed in the Current Colors column, in what is called "hue-forward" sorting. That means they are arranged, from top to bottom, in the ordering of the color wheel: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet.

 Note
If the colors of the logo do not change, make sure that Recolor Art is selected in the lower-left corner of the Recolor Artwork dialog box.

5. Under Color Groups in the Recolor Artwork dialog box, select the "Logo 2" color group you created earlier. The selected artwork on the artboard should change in color.

On the left side of the Recolor Artwork dialog box, notice that the colors of the color group named "Logo 2" are assigned to the colors in the logo. The Current Colors column shows what the color was in the logo, and an arrow to the right of each of those colors points to the New column, which contains what the color has become (or has been reassigned to). Notice that the white color has not been modified and that there is no arrow pointing to a color in the New column. That's because white, black, and grays are typically preserved, or unchanged.
6. Click the Hide Color Group Storage icon () to hide the color groups. Drag the dialog box by the title bar at the top so that you can see the artwork.
7. Click the small arrow to the right of the dark-green bar in the Current Colors column (see the figure).
This tells Illustrator not to change that specific green color in the logo. You can see that reflected in the logo on the artboard.

Now suppose that you wanted to change the white color in the "Logo 2" color group. That's what you'll do next.
8. Click the line to the right of the white color in the Current Colors column and the line will change into an arrow that looks dimmed.
The arrow indicates to Illustrator that you want the white color to be different, but there currently is no color in the New column to change it to.

9. Click the Show Color Group Storage icon () to show the color groups.
10. Click another color group in the Color Groups area on the right side of the panel, and then click to select the "Logo 2" color group again.

This is one of the easiest ways to reapply the color group colors, and it will fill in the missing color to the right of the white in the Current Colors column.
You might not like how it assigned the colors to your artwork, and that's what you'll edit next.
11. In the New column of the Recolor Artwork dialog box, drag the top blue color box in the column down on top of the brown color and release the mouse button.

This is one way that you can reassign the "Logo 2" group colors to the colors in the logo. The colors in the New column show what you see in the artwork. If you click one of the colors in the New column, notice that the CMYK sliders at the bottom of the dialog box let you edit that one color.
12. Double-click the brown color box at the top of the New column. In the Color Picker dialog box, click the Color Swatches button (on the right side) and select the color named "Light Green." You may need to scroll in the list of color swatches. Click OK to return to the Recolor Artwork dialog box.

13. In the Recolor Artwork dialog box, click the Save Changes To Color Group button () to save the changes to the color group without closing the dialog box. Click OK.
The color changes that you made to the color group are saved in the Swatches panel.

14. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

 Note
To learn more, search for "Working with color groups" in Illustrator Help.

There are many kinds of color edits that can be made to selected artwork in the Recolor Artwork dialog box, including reducing the number of colors, applying other colors (like Pantone colors), and much more.

Painting with patterns
In addition to process and spot colors, the Swatches panel can also contain pattern and gradient swatches. Illustrator provides sample swatches of each type in the default Swatches panel as separate libraries, and lets you create your own patterns and gradients. In this section, you will focus on creating, applying, and editing patterns.


 Note
To learn more about working with gradients, see Lesson 9, "Blending Colors and Shapes."


Applying existing patterns
A pattern is artwork saved in the Swatches panel that can be applied to the stroke or fill of an object. You can customize existing patterns and design patterns from scratch with any of the Illustrator tools. All patterns start with a single tile that is tiled (repeated) within a shape, starting at the ruler origin and continuing to the right. Next, you will apply an existing pattern to a shape.

1. Choose 1 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the large light-brown shape in the sign and choose Object > Hide > Selection to temporarily hide it.

 Note
Selecting the Fill box is important. When you apply a pattern swatch, it applies to the stroke or the fill that is selected.

3. In the Swatches panel, click the Swatch Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the panel and choose Patterns > Basic Graphics > Basic Graphics_Textures to open the pattern library.
4. Using the Selection tool, click to select the large white rectangle off the left edge of the first artboard. Make sure that the Fill box toward the bottom of the Tools panel is selected.

 Tip
You can type the word "sticks" in the Find field to sort the pattern swatches, or choose Small List View from the panel menu to see the names of the pattern swatches.

5. Select the "Sticks" pattern swatch in the Basic Graphics_Textures panel to fill the path with the pattern.

 Note
You may also see the PANTONE+ Solid Coated panel grouped with the Basic Graphics_Textures panel and that's okay.

6. Close the Basic Graphics_Textures panel, and notice that the pattern swatch fills the shape and is added to the list in the Swatches panel. Click the Swatches panel icon to collapse the panel.

7. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Creating your own pattern
In this section of the lesson, you will create your own custom pattern and add it to the Swatches panel.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the yellow leaf shape off the left edge of the artboard.
2. Choose Object > Pattern > Make. Click OK in the dialog box that appears.

 Note
You don't need to have anything selected to start with a blank pattern.

When you create a pattern, Illustrator enters Pattern Editing mode, which is similar to the group Isolation mode you've worked with in previous lessons. Pattern Editing mode allows you to create and edit patterns interactively, while previewing the changes to the pattern on the artboard. The Pattern Options panel (Window > Pattern Options) also opens, giving you all of the necessary options to create your pattern.
3. With the Selection tool, click the center leaf to select it.

 Note
A pattern can be composed of shapes, symbols, or embedded raster images, among other objects. For instance, to create a flannel pattern for a shirt, you can create three overlapping rectangles or lines, each with varying appearance options.

4. Press Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows) several times, to zoom in.
Notice the series of lighter-colored leaves around the center shape. This is the leaf shape repeated into a pattern and dimmed to let you focus on the original. The blue box around the leaf is the pattern tile (the area that repeats).

5. With the leaf shape selected, change the Fill color to the "Forest Green" swatch (in the "Tree Logo" color group) and the Stroke to None () in the Control panel, if necessary.
6. Change the Opacity to 80% in the Control panel to make it partially transparent.
The first thing you'll do is explore some of the pattern options, and then you'll edit the artwork in the pattern some more.
7. In the Pattern Options panel, change the Name to Leaves and choose Hex By Column for the Tile Type.
The name appears in the Swatches panel as a tool tip and can be useful to distinguish multiple pattern swatches. The Tile Type determines how the pattern is tiled. You have three main Tile Type choices: the default grid pattern, a brick-style pattern, or the hex pattern. The Brick Offset options can be selected when you choose a brick Tile Type.

8. With the Selection tool selected, drag the leaf to the left a little. Notice that the blue tile moves with the artwork.
9. Click the Symbols panel () icon to open the panel. Hover the pointer over the green leaves to see a tool tip name of "MediumLeaf." Drag the MediumLeaf symbol just to the right of the original leaf.
10. Drag the "SmallLeaf" symbol from the Symbols panel just below the two other symbols. Drag the two symbols so they look something like the following figure.

After adding the new content to the pattern, you can see that the pattern tile does not contain the new content.
11. Select the Size Tile To Art option in the Pattern Options panel.

 Note
In this step, you can see the leaves more clearly. At this point, try to arrange the leaves like you see in the figure.

The Size Tile To Art selection fits the tile area (the blue hex shape) to the bounds of the artwork, changing the spacing between the repeated objects. With Size Tile To Art deselected, you could manually change the width and the height of the pattern definition area in the Width and Height fields to include more content or to edit the spacing between. You can also edit the tile area manually with the Pattern Tile Tool button () in the upper-left corner of the Pattern Options panel.

12. Change the H Spacing to -18 pt, and change the V Spacing to -18 pt.
13. For Overlap, click the Bottom In Front button () to see the change in the pattern.

 Tip
The spacing values can be either positive or negative values, to move the tiles apart or to bring them closer together.

The artwork in a pattern may begin to overlap, due to the size of the tile or the spacing values. By default, when objects overlap horizontally, the left object is on top; when objects overlap vertically, the top object is on top.

14. Change the H Spacing and V Spacing values back to 0 in.
The Pattern Options panel has a host of other pattern-editing options, including the ability to see more or less of the pattern, called Copies. To learn more about the Pattern Options panel, search for "Create and edit patterns" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).
15. Select Show Swatch Bounds at the bottom of the Pattern Options panel to see the dotted area that will be saved in the swatch. Deselect Show Swatch Bounds.

 Tip
If you want to create pattern variations, you can click Save A Copy in the bar along the top of the Document window when in Pattern Editing mode. This saves the current pattern in the Swatches panel as a copy and allows you to continue creating.

16. Click Done in the bar along the top of the Document window. In the dialog box that appears, click OK.

17. Choose File > Save.

Applying your pattern
You can assign a pattern using a number of different methods. In this lesson, you will use the Swatches panel to apply the pattern. You can also apply the pattern using the Fill color in the Control panel.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. With the Selection tool (), click the shape filled with the "Sticks" pattern swatch off the left edge of the artboard.
3. Select the swatch named "Leaves" from the Fill color in the Control panel.

4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

 Note
Your pattern may look different, and that's okay.


Editing your pattern
Next, you will edit the Leaves pattern swatch in Pattern Editing mode.

1. In the Swatches panel, double-click the Leaves pattern swatch to edit it.
2. In Pattern Editing mode, with the Selection tool () selected, choose Select > All to select all three green leaves.

 Tip
You can also select an object filled with a pattern swatch and, with the Fill box selected in the Swatches, Color, or Tools panel, choose Object > Pattern > Edit Pattern.

3. In the Control panel, change the Fill color to the swatch named "Forest Green" (it's in the "Tree Logo" color group). Right now there are different green colors applied, so it won't look that different.
4. Choose Select > Deselect.
5. Click the smallest leaf, and change the Opacity to 30% in the Control panel. Click the medium-sized leaf, and change the Opacity to 45%, by typing in the value.

6. Click Done in the gray bar along the top of the Document window to exit Pattern Editing mode.

 Tip
In the Scale dialog box, if you wanted to scale the pattern AND the shape, you could select Transform Objects and select Transform Patterns. You can also transform patterns in the Transform panel by choosing Transform Pattern Only, Transform Object Only, or Transform Both from the panel menu () before applying a transformation.

7. Click the shape off the left edge of the artboard with the Leaves pattern fill to select it. Double-click the Scale tool () in the Tools panel to scale the pattern, but not the shape. In the Scale dialog box, change the following options (if not already set):
• Uniform Scale: 90%
• Scale Rectangle Corners: Deselected (the default setting)
• Scale Strokes & Effects: Deselected (the default setting)
• Transform Objects: Deselected
• Transform Patterns: Selected

8. Select Preview to see the change. Click OK, and leave the shape selected.

 Note
The Align options may not appear in the Control panel. If you don't see the Align options, click the word "Align" in the Control panel to open the Align panel. The number of options displayed in the Control panel depends on your screen resolution.

9. With the Selection tool selected and the Leaves pattern-filled shape still selected, Shift-click the dark-green rectangle behind the sign to select both shapes. Release the Shift key, and click once more on the dark-green shape to set it as the key object to align to. Click the Horizontal Align Center () button and the Vertical Align Center () button to align the leaf-filled shape to the green rectangle.

10. On the artboard, select and delete the original yellow leaf that you used to create the pattern.
11. Open the Layers panel (), and make all layers visible by selecting the Visibility column to the left of the layer named "Sign Text." Click the Layers panel icon to collapse the panel group.

12. Choose Object > Show All.
13. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Working with Live Paint
Live Paint lets you paint vector graphics intuitively, by automatically detecting and correcting gaps that might otherwise affect the application of fills and strokes. Paths divide the drawing surface into areas that can be colored, whether the area is bounded by a single path or by segments of multiple paths. Painting objects with Live Paint is like coloring in a coloring book or using watercolors to paint a sketch, and the underlying shapes are not edited.


 Note
To learn more about Live Paint and all that it can do, search for "Live Paint groups" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).


Creating a Live Paint group
Next, you will paint a simpler version of the logo using the Live Paint Bucket tool.

1. Choose 5 Artboard 5 from the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
2. With the Selection tool () selected, choose Select > All On Active Artboard.
3. Choose View > Zoom Out, several times, until you see the tree shape off the right edge of the artboard.
That shape is not selected, but you will add it to the rest of the shapes soon.
4. Select the Live Paint Bucket tool () from the Shape Builder tool () group in the Tools panel.

 Note
Positioning the pointer over a color group will show you the name of the color group in a tool tip.

5. Click the Swatches panel icon () to show the panel. Select the first (dark) blue swatch in the "Logo 2" color group in the Swatches panel.
6. Position the pointer over the first tree shape (on the left), and click to convert the selected shapes to a Live Paint group.

You can click any of the shapes to convert it to a Live Paint group, but the shape you click is filled with the dark-blue color. Clicking selected shapes with the Live Paint Bucket tool creates a Live Paint group that you can paint with that same tool. Once a Live Paint group is created, the paths are fully editable, but they are treated like a group. Colors are automatically reapplied to new regions created when you move or adjust a path's shape.

Painting with the Live Paint Bucket tool
After objects are converted to a Live Paint group, you can paint them using several methods, which is what you'll do next.

1. Position the pointer over the second tree from the left in the Live Paint group (not where the trees overlap).
A red highlight appears around the shape that will be painted, and three color swatches appear above the pointer. The selected color (dark blue) is in the middle, and the two adjacent colors in the Swatches panel are on either side.
2. Press the left arrow key once to select the lighter-green swatch (shown in the three swatches above the pointer). As you press the arrow key to change colors, notice, in the Swatches panel, that the color is highlighted. You can press the up or down arrow key, along with right or left arrow keys, to select a new swatch to paint with. Click to apply the lighter-green color to the tree shape.
3. In the Swatches panel, click to select the swatch named "Dark Brown." Click to fill the overlapping (white) shape between the trees.

4. Double-click the Live Paint Bucket tool () in the Tools panel. This opens the Live Paint Bucket Options dialog box. Select the Paint Strokes option, and then click OK.

 Note
To learn more about the Live Paint Bucket Options dialog box, including working with Gap Options, search for "Paint with the Live Paint Bucket tool" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

Next, you'll remove the inner gray stroke from the shapes and retain the outer strokes.

5. Select None () from the Stroke color in the Control panel. Press the Escape key.

 Note
We exaggerated the red line in the figure so you could more easily see it.

6. Position the tip () of the pointer directly over the gray stroke, between the two tree shapes, as shown in the figure. When the pointer changes to a paintbrush (), click the stroke to remove the stroke color (by applying the None swatch).

7. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Modifying a Live Paint group
When you make a Live Paint group, each path remains editable. When you move or adjust a path, the colors that were previously applied don't just stay where they were, like they do in natural media paintings or with image-editing software. Instead, the colors are automatically reapplied to the new regions that are formed by the intersecting paths. Next, you will edit the paths by adding another shape.

1. Select the Selection tool (), and click to select the white tree shape off the right edge of the artboard. Drag it so that it overlaps the rightmost tree shape.

2. With the Selection tool, Shift-click the Live Paint group to select both objects.
3. Click the Merge Live Paint button in the Control panel to add the new white shape to the Live Paint group.
4. Select the Live Paint Bucket tool () in the Tools panel. In the Swatches panel (), click to select one of the brown colors in the "Logo 2" group. Click to paint the part of the new tree that is not overlapping the other tree.

5. Select another swatch (we chose white), and click to paint the part of the circle that overlaps the light-green tree.
6. Select None () from the Stroke color in the Control panel. Press the Escape key to hide the panel. Position the pointer directly over the stroke, between the tree shapes. When the paintbrush () appears, click the stroke to remove it.

 Note
If you find that the stroke is not going away, try selecting the None swatch again for the Stroke color, positioning the pointer over the stroke, and clicking again when you see the paintbrush icon.

7. Select the Selection tool, and with the Live Paint object selected, you will see the words "Live Paint" on the left end of the Control panel. Double-click the Live Paint object (the trees) to enter Isolation mode.
8. Drag the rightmost tree shape to the left to reposition it.
Notice how the color fill and stroke changes every time you release the mouse button.


 Tip
You could also edit the anchor points of the selected artwork using the Direct Selection tool (), for instance. The paths are still editable, and the colors are reapplied to the new regions that are formed by edited paths.

9. Choose Select > Deselect, and then press the Escape key to exit Isolation mode.
10. Choose View > Fit All In Window.
11. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.

Review questions
1. Describe what a global color is.

2. How can you save a color?
3. How can you choose color harmonies for color inspiration?
4. Name two things that the Recolor Artwork dialog box allows you to do.
5. How do you add pattern swatches to the Swatches panel?
6. Explain what Live Paint allows you to do.

Review answers
1. A global color is a color swatch that, when you edit it, automatically updates all artwork to which it is applied. All spot colors are global; however, process colors can be either global or local.

2. You can save a color for painting other objects in your artwork by adding it to the Swatches panel by doing one of the following:
• Drag the color from a Fill box, and drop it over the Swatches panel.
• Click the New Swatch button () at the bottom of the Swatches panel.
• Choose New Swatch from the Swatches panel menu ().
• Choose Create New Swatch from the Color panel menu ().
3. You can choose color harmonies from the Color Guide panel. Color harmonies are used to generate a color scheme based on a single color.
4. You use the Recolor Artwork dialog box to change the colors used in selected artwork, create and edit color groups, or reassign or reduce the colors in your artwork, among other functions.
5. You can add pattern swatches to the Swatches panel either by creating content for the pattern or by deselecting all content and choosing Object > Pattern > Make. In Pattern Editing mode, you can edit the pattern and preview it. You can also drag artwork into the swatch list in the Swatches panel.
6. Live Paint lets you paint vector graphics intuitively, by automatically detecting and correcting gaps that might otherwise affect the application of fills and strokes. Paths divide the drawing surface into areas, any of which can be colored, regardless of whether the area is bounded by a single path or by segments of multiple paths.







7. Adding Type to a Poster

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Create and edit area and point type.
• Import text.
• Create columns of text.
• Change text attributes.
• Modify text with the Touch Type tool.
• Create and edit paragraph and character styles.
• Copy and apply text attributes by sampling type.
• Reshape text with a warp.
• Create type on a path and on shapes.
• Wrap type around an object.
• Create text outlines.

This lesson takes approximately 75 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



Text as a design element plays a major role in your illustrations. Like other objects, type can be painted, scaled, rotated, and more. In this lesson, you'll discover how to create basic text and interesting text effects.


Getting started
You'll be adding type to a poster during this lesson, but before you begin, restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator CC. Then open the finished art file for this lesson to see the illustration.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See "Getting Started" at the beginning of the book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Choose File > Open. Locate the file named L7_end.ai in the Lessons > Lesson07 folder. Click Open. You will most likely see a Missing Fonts dialog box since the file is using a specific Typekit font. Simply click Close in the Missing Fonts dialog box. You will learn all about Typekit fonts later in this lesson.
In this lesson, you will create the text for this poster. Leave it open for reference later in the lesson, if you like.

4. Choose File > Open. In the Open dialog box, navigate to the Lessons > Lesson07 folder. Open the L7_start.ai file.
This file already has non-text components in it. You will add all of the text elements to complete the poster and card.
5. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the Lesson07 folder and name the file ZooPoster.ai. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and then click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.

6. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn off the Smart Guides. Turning off the Smart Guides will make it easier to create text without snapping to existing content.
7. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the Workspace menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.


Adding type to the poster
Type features are some of the most powerful tools in Illustrator. You can add a single line of type to your artwork, create columns and rows of text like you do in Adobe InDesign, flow text into a shape or along a path, and work with letterforms as graphic objects. In Illustrator, you can create text in three different ways: as point type, area type, and type on a path. You will learn about each as you proceed through this lesson.


Adding text at a point
Point type is a horizontal or vertical line of text that begins where you click and expands as you enter characters. Each line of text is independent—the line expands or shrinks as you edit it but doesn't wrap to the next line unless you add a paragraph return or a soft return. Entering text this way is useful for adding a headline or a few words to your artwork. Next, you will enter some text in the poster as point type.

1. Ensure that 1 Flyer is chosen in the Artboard Navigation menu in the lower-left corner of the Document window, and choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click the upper-left corner of the artboard twice, slowly. Remember that where you click is centered in the Document window.
3. Choose Window > Layers to show the panel. Select the Text layer, if it's not already selected, to ensure that the content you create is on that layer. Click the Layers panel tab to collapse it.

4. Select the Type tool (), and click in the white area in the upper-left corner of the artboard. The cursor appears on the artboard. Type ZOO TALES (in uppercase). By simply clicking with the Type tool, you create a point type object.

 Note
Point type that is scaled may not be a whole number (such as 12 pt).

5. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and notice the bounding box that appears around the text. Drag the right, middle bounding point (NOT the circle), to the right. Notice that the text stretches as you drag any bounding point.

6. Choose Edit > Undo Scale, and then choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

Adding area type
Area type uses the boundaries of an object (like a rectangle) to control the flow of characters, either horizontally or vertically. When the text reaches a boundary, it automatically wraps to fit inside the defined area. Entering text in this way is useful when you want to create one or more paragraphs, such as for a poster or a brochure.

To create area type, you click with the Type tool () where you want the text and drag to create an area type object (also called a text area). You can also convert an existing shape or object to a type object by clicking the edge of an object (or inside the object) with the Type tool. When the cursor appears, you can type. An area type object has two extra boxes on the bounding box, called ports. Ports are used to thread (flow) text from one type area to another, which you will learn about later in this lesson.
Next, you will create an area type object and enter more text.

 Note
The Zoo Sign view is at the bottom of the View menu, and you may need to scroll.

1. Choose View > Smart Guides to turn on the Smart Guides.
2. Choose View > Zoo Sign to zoom in to the black shape at the bottom of the artboard that will become a zoo sign.
3. Select the Type tool (). Position the cursor to the left of the striped orange-and-black tail, in the white area (see the red X in the figure). Click and drag down and to the right to create a text area with an approximate width and height of 1 inch.

4. With the cursor in the new text area, type Safari Zoo California.
Notice how the text wraps horizontally to fit within the type area. By default, when you create area type by dragging with the Type tool, the type area will not resize to fit the text within (similar to how InDesign treats text frames, by default). If there is too much text, the text that doesn't fit will not be visible and will be considered overset.

5. Select the Selection tool (), and looking at the bottom, middle bounding point you will see the Autosize widget () indicating that the type area is not set to autosize. Hover the pointer over the box at the end of the widget (the pointer will change []), and double-click.

By double-clicking the widget, you turn Autosizing on. As the text is edited and re-edited, the frame shrinks and grows vertically to accommodate the changing amount of copy, and eliminates overset text without manually sizing and resizing frames.

 Tip
If Autosizing is enabled for a selected type area, you can also drag one of the bottom bounding points on the type area down and Autosizing will be disabled for the type area.

6. Select the Type tool and insert the cursor after the word "California" press Enter or Return and type San Diego.
The type area will expand vertically to fit the new text.


 Tip
If you double-click text with the Selection () or Direct Selection tool (), the Type tool becomes selected.

7. Select the Selection tool and hover the pointer over the bottom, middle point again and the cursor will change ().
This annotator indicates that the type area is set to auto size. If you were to double click, Autosizing would be turned off for the area type. The type area would remain the current size no matter how much text was added.

8. Select the Type tool and select all of the text, except for "Safari Zoo" and delete it.
Notice that the type area shrank vertically to fit around the text.
9. Select the Selection tool and drag from within the "Safari Zoo" text down and to the left of the black sign shape with the green stroke. You need to drag directly from the text, not from a blank area in the type area.

10. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Converting between area and point type
You can easily convert between area and point type objects. This method can be useful if you type a headline by clicking (creating point type), but later wish to resize and add more text without stretching it. This method is also useful if you paste a paragraph of text from InDesign into Illustrator, and it pastes as point type but would be better suited as an area type object so that you could flow the text within.

Next, you will convert a text object from point type to area type.
1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Select the Type tool (), and click to create a point type object in the white space to the right of the orange-and-black tail. Type Thursdays at 6:30 pm (without a period). You will move this text later, as well.

3. Select the Zoom tool (), and click several times to zoom in to the text.
4. Select the Selection tool (), and notice the bounding box around the text. Drag the right-center bounding point to the left. Since it's point type, the text stretches. Choose Edit > Undo Scale to reset the text.
The text "6:30 pm" needs to wrap down below the text "Thursdays at..." An easy way to do that is to convert the point type to area type, which is what you'll do next. Of course, you could also insert a paragraph or soft return in the text, but later you may want to resize the type area.

 Note
Converting an area type object that has overflow text (you will learn about overflow text later) will show a warning when converted to point type, indicating that the overset text will be deleted.

5. Position the pointer over the annotator () off the right edge of the type object. A hollow end on the annotator indicates point type. When the pointer changes (), click once to see the message "Double-click to convert to Area Type." Double-click the annotator to convert the point type to area type. The annotator end should now be filled (), indicating that it is an area type object.
