



Adobe Illustrator CC Classroom in a Book® (2014 release)
The official training workbook from Adobe
Brian Wood








Adobe® Illustrator® CC Classroom in a Book® (2014 release)
© 2015 Adobe Systems Incorporated and its licensors. All rights reserved.
If this guide is distributed with software that includes an end user license agreement, this guide, as well as the software described in it, is furnished under license and may be used or copied only in accordance with the terms of such license. Except as permitted by any such license, no part of this guide may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of Adobe Systems Incorporated. Please note that the content in this guide is protected under copyright law even if it is not distributed with software that includes an end user license agreement.
The content of this guide is furnished for informational use only, is subject to change without notice, and should not be construed as a commitment by Adobe Systems Incorporated. Adobe Systems Incorporated assumes no responsibility or liability for any errors or inaccuracies that may appear in the informational content contained in this guide.
Please remember that existing artwork or images that you may want to include in your project may be protected under copyright law. The unauthorized incorporation of such material into your new work could be a violation of the rights of the copyright owner. Please be sure to obtain any permission required from the copyright owner.
Any references to company names in sample files are for demonstration purposes only and are not intended to refer to any actual organization.
Adobe, the Adobe logo, Acrobat, Classroom in a Book, Flash, Illustrator, InDesign, Dreamweaver, Fireworks, Photoshop, Bridge, Muse, PostScript, and PostScript 3 are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other countries.
Apple, iPhone, Mac, Mac OS, and Macintosh are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. Microsoft, Windows, Windows XP, Windows 7, and Windows 8 are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries. Wacom and Intuos are trademarks of Wacom Company Ltd. PANTONE®, myPANTONE™ and other Pantone LLC properties are trademarks or registered trademarks of Pantone LLC in the United States and other countries. All rights reserved. NVIDIA is a trademark and/or registered trademark of NVIDIA Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
Adobe Systems Incorporated, 345 Park Avenue, San Jose, California 95110-2704, USA
Notice to U.S. Government End Users. The Software and Documentation are "Commercial Items," as that term is defined at 48 C.F.R. §2.101, consisting of "Commercial Computer Software" and "Commercial Computer Software Documentation," as such terms are used in 48 C.F.R. §12.212 or 48 C.F.R. §227.7202, as applicable. Consistent with 48 C.F.R. §12.212 or 48 C.F.R. §§227.7202-1 through 227.7202-4, as applicable, the Commercial Computer Software and Commercial Computer Software Documentation are being licensed to U.S. Government end users (a) only as Commercial Items and (b) with only those rights as are granted to all other end users pursuant to the terms and conditions herein. Unpublished-rights reserved under the copyright laws of the United States. Adobe Systems Incorporated, 345 Park Avenue, San Jose, CA 95110-2704, USA. For U.S. Government End Users, Adobe agrees to comply with all applicable equal opportunity laws including, if appropriate, the provisions of Executive Order 11246, as amended, Section 402 of the Vietnam Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 (38 USC 4212), and Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, and the regulations at 41 CFR Parts 60-1 through 60-60, 60-250, and 60-741. The affirmative action clause and regulations contained in the preceding sentence shall be incorporated by reference.
Adobe Press books are published by Peachpit, a division of Pearson Education located in San Francisco, California. For the latest on Adobe Press books, go to www.adobepress.com. To report errors, please send a note to errata@peachpit.com. For information on getting permission for reprints and excerpts, contact permissions@peachpit.com.
Printed and bound in the United States of America
ISBN-13: 978-0-133-90565-6ISBN-10:         0-133-90565-9
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1







How to Get Your Lesson Files
Thank you for purchasing this digital version of:
Adobe Illustrator CC Classroom in a Book (2014 release)
In order to work through the projects in this book, you will need to download the lesson files from peachpit.com. Each download link gives you the files for a single lesson.
To access these files, follow the steps below:
1. On a Mac or PC, go to www.peachpit.com/redeem and enter this code:A9B6793BB2AC
2. If you do not have a Peachpit.com account, you will be prompted to create one.
3. The downloadable files will be listed under Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page (see image below; your list of files may look a little different).
4. Click the lesson file links to download them to your computer.
If you are unable to locate the files for this title by following the steps above, please email ask@peachpit.com and supply the code from step one. Our customer service representatives will assist you as soon as possible.

What to do with the Lesson files once you've downloaded them
The files are compressed into Zip archives to speed up download time and to protect the contents from damage during transfer. You must uncompress (or "unzip") the files to restore them to their original size and format before you use them with the book. Modern Mac and Windows systems are set up to open Zip archives by simply double-clicking.
After unzipping the files, create a new folder named "Lessons" in a convenient location on your computer.
• If you're running Windows, right-click and choose New > Folder. Then enter the new name for your folder.
• If you're using Mac OS, in the Finder, choose File > New Folder. Type the new name and drag the folder to the location you want to use.
Drag the unzipped Lessons folders (Lesson01, Lesson02, etc.) to your new "Lessons" folder. When you begin each lesson, navigate to the folder with that lesson number to access all the assets you need to complete the lesson.
Important!
The lesson files are provided solely for your personal use. You are not authorized to use these files commercially, or to publish or distribute them in any form without written permission from Adobe Systems.







Contents
WHERE ARE THE LESSON FILES?
GETTING STARTED
About Classroom in a Book
Prerequisites
Installing the program
Fonts used in this book
Accessing the Classroom in a Book files
Restoring default preferences
To delete or save the current Illustrator preferences file
To restore saved preferences after completing the lessons
Additional resources
Adobe Authorized Training Centers
Sync settings using Adobe Creative Cloud
WHAT'S NEW IN ADOBE ILLUSTRATOR CC (2014 RELEASE)
Creative Cloud Libraries
Curvature tool
Touch workspace
Area type Autosizing
Live Shapes
Typekit integration
Pen tool preview and drawing-related enhancements
Pencil tool enhancements
Path segment reshaping
Join tool
Other enhancements
A QUICK TOUR OF ADOBE® ILLUSTRATOR® CC (2014 RELEASE)
Getting started
Creating a new document
Sync settings using Adobe Creative Cloud
Drawing shapes
Applying color
Working with layers
Drawing with the Pencil tool
Editing strokes
Working with the Width tool
Creating shapes using the Shape Builder tool
Copying content
Working with symbols
Placing images in Illustrator
Using Image Trace
Creating a clipping mask
Creating and editing gradients
Working with type
Warping text
Working with brushes
Working with effects
1 GETTING TO KNOW THE WORK AREA
Introducing Adobe Illustrator
Starting Illustrator and opening a file
Understanding the workspace
Adjusting the user-interface brightness
Working with the Tools panel
Exploring the Control panel
Working with panels
Editing panel groups
Resetting and saving your workspace
Using panel menus
Changing the view of artwork
Using view commands
Using the Zoom tool
Scrolling through a document
Viewing artwork
Navigating multiple artboards
Using the Navigator panel
Arranging multiple documents
Finding resources for using Illustrator
2 TECHNIQUES FOR SELECTING ARTWORK
Getting started
Selecting objects
Using the Selection tool
Using the Direct Selection tool
Creating selections with a marquee
Creating selections with the Magic Wand tool
Selecting similar objects
Selecting in Outline mode
Aligning objects
Aligning objects to each other
Aligning to a key object
Aligning anchor points
Distributing objects
Aligning to the artboard
Working with groups
Grouping items
Working in Isolation mode
Creating a nested group
Exploring object arrangement
Arranging objects
Selecting objects behind
Hiding and locking objects
3 USING SHAPES TO CREATE ARTWORK FOR A POSTCARD
Getting started
Creating a new document
Working with basic shapes
Creating rectangles
Creating a rounded rectangle
Editing the corners of a Live Shape
Creating an ellipse
Creating polygons
Creating stars
Changing stroke width and alignment
Working with lines
Joining paths
Editing and combining paths and shapes
Using the Width tool
Outlining strokes
Working with the Shape Builder tool
Working with the Pathfinder panel
Using the Eraser tool
Working with drawing modes
Working with Draw Behind mode
Using the Draw Inside mode
Editing content drawn inside
Using Image Trace to create shapes
4 TRANSFORMING ARTWORK
Getting started
Working with artboards
Adding artboards to the document
Editing artboards
Renaming artboards
Reordering artboards
Transforming content
Working with rulers and guides
Positioning objects precisely
Scaling objects
Reflecting objects
Distorting objects with effects
Rotating objects
Shearing objects
Transforming with the Free Transform tool
Creating a PDF
5 CREATING AN ILLUSTRATION WITH THE DRAWING TOOLS
Getting started
Getting started with the Pen tool
Selecting paths
Constraining lines
Introducing curved paths
Drawing a curve with the Pen tool
Drawing a series of curves with the Pen tool
Converting smooth points to corner points
Combining curves and straight lines
Creating the ice cream illustration
Drawing the ice cream with the Pen tool
Drawing the dish with the Curvature tool
Finishing the ice cream dish
Editing curves
Deleting and adding anchor points
Converting between smooth points and corner points
Working with the Anchor Point tool
Cutting with the Scissors tool
Creating a dashed line
Cutting with the Knife tool
Adding arrowheads
Drawing and editing with the Pencil tool
6 USING COLOR AND PATTERNS TO ENHANCE SIGNAGE
Getting started
Understanding color
Exploring color modes
Understanding the main color controls
Working with color
Applying an existing color
Creating and saving a custom color as a swatch
Creating a copy of a swatch
Editing a swatch
Creating and editing a global swatch
Using the Color Picker to create color
Using Illustrator swatch libraries
Creating a spot color
Creating and saving a tint of a color
Adjusting colors
Copying appearance attributes
Creating a color group
Working with color in the Color Guide panel
Editing a color group in the Edit Colors dialog box
Editing colors in artwork
Assigning colors to your artwork
Painting with patterns
Applying existing patterns
Creating your own pattern
Applying your pattern
Editing your pattern
Working with Live Paint
Creating a Live Paint group
Painting with the Live Paint Bucket tool
Modifying a Live Paint group
7 ADDING TYPE TO A POSTER
Getting started
Adding type to the poster
Adding text at a point
Adding area type
Converting between area and point type
Importing a plain text file
Working with overflow text and text reflow
Threading text
Creating columns of text
Formatting type
Changing font family and font style
Changing font size
Changing font color
Changing additional text attributes
Modifying text with the Touch Type tool
Changing paragraph attributes
Resizing and reshaping type objects
Creating and applying text styles
Creating and applying a paragraph style
Editing a paragraph style
Creating and applying a character style
Editing a character style
Sampling text formatting
Warping text
Reshaping text with a preset envelope warp
Editing the envelope warp
Working with type on a path
Creating type on a path
Creating type on a closed path
Editing type on a path options
Wrapping text around an object
Creating text outlines
8 ORGANIZING YOUR ARTWORK WITH LAYERS
Getting started
Understanding layers
Creating layers and sublayers
Editing layers and objects
Locating layers
Moving layers and content between layers
Duplicating layer content
Merging layers
Pasting layers
Changing layer order
Viewing layers
Applying appearance attributes to layers
Creating a clipping mask
9 BLENDING COLORS AND SHAPES
Getting started
Working with gradients
Creating and applying a linear gradient to a fill
Adjusting the direction and angle of a gradient fill
Applying and editing a gradient on a stroke
Creating and applying a radial gradient
Editing the radial gradient colors
Adjusting the radial gradient
Applying gradients to multiple objects
Adding transparency to gradients
Working with blended objects
Creating a blend with specified steps
Modifying a blend
Finishing the blend
Creating and editing a smooth color blend
10 USING BRUSHES TO CREATE A POSTER
Getting started
Working with brushes
Using Calligraphic brushes
Applying a Calligraphic brush to artwork
Drawing with the Paintbrush tool
Editing paths with the Paintbrush tool
Editing a brush
Removing a brush stroke
Using Art brushes
Applying an existing Art brush
Creating an Art brush using a raster image
Editing an Art brush
Using Bristle brushes
Changing Bristle brush options
Painting with a Bristle brush
Using Pattern brushes
Creating a Pattern brush
Applying a Pattern brush
Editing the Pattern brush
Working with the Blob Brush tool
Drawing with the Blob Brush tool
Merging paths with the Blob Brush tool
Editing with the Eraser tool
11 EXPLORING CREATIVE USES OF EFFECTS AND GRAPHIC STYLES
Getting started
Using the Appearance panel
Editing appearance attributes
Adding another stroke and fill
Reordering appearance attributes
Using live effects
Applying an effect
Editing an effect
Styling text with a Warp effect
Applying the Offset Path effect
Applying a raster effect
Working with 3D effects
Applying a 3D Rotate effect
Using graphic styles
Applying an existing graphic style
Creating and applying a graphic style
Updating a graphic style
Applying a graphic style to a layer
Scaling strokes and effects
12 CREATING A PRODUCT MOCKUP IN PERSPECTIVE
Getting started
Understanding the perspective grid
Working with the perspective grid
Using a preset grid
Adjusting the perspective grid
Drawing objects in perspective
Selecting and transforming objects in perspective
Duplicating content in perspective
Moving objects in a perpendicular direction
Moving planes and objects together
Bringing content into perspective
Drawing with no active grid
Adding and editing text in perspective
Moving a plane to match an object
Adding symbols to the perspective grid
Editing symbols in perspective
Grouping content in perspective
Releasing content from perspective
13 USING SYMBOLS TO CREATE A MAP
Getting started
Working with symbols
Using existing Illustrator symbol libraries
Editing a symbol
Creating symbols
Duplicating symbols
Replacing symbols
Breaking a link to a symbol
Editing symbol options
Working with the Symbolism tools
Spraying symbol instances
Editing symbols with the Symbolism tools
14 USING ILLUSTRATOR CC WITH OTHER ADOBE APPLICATIONS
Getting started
Combining artwork
Placing image files
Placing an image
Scaling a placed image
Placing a Photoshop image with Show Import Options
Placing multiple images
Applying color edits to an image
Masking images
Applying a simple mask to an image
Editing a clipping path (mask)
Masking an object with text
Creating an opacity mask
Editing an opacity mask
Sampling colors in placed images
Working with image links
Finding link information
Embedding and unembedding images
Replacing a linked image
Packaging a file
15 PREPARING CONTENT FOR THE WEB
Getting started
Saving content for the Web
Aligning content to the pixel grid
Slicing content
Selecting and editing slices
Using the Save For Web command
Creating CSS code
Setting up your design for generating CSS
Working with character styles and CSS code
Working with graphic styles and CSS code
Copying CSS
Exporting CSS
Saving artwork as SVG
INDEX







Getting Started
Adobe® Illustrator® CC is the industry-standard illustration application for print, multimedia, and online graphics. Whether you are a designer or a technical illustrator producing artwork for print publishing, an artist producing multimedia graphics, or a creator of web pages or online content, Adobe Illustrator offers you the tools you need to get professional-quality results.

About Classroom in a Book
Adobe Illustrator CC Classroom in a Book® (2014 release) is part of the official training series for Adobe graphics and publishing software developed with the support of Adobe product experts.

The lessons are designed so that you can learn at your own pace. If you're new to Adobe Illustrator, you'll learn the fundamentals you need to master to put the application to work. If you are an experienced user, you'll find that Classroom in a Book teaches many advanced features, including tips and techniques for using the latest version of Adobe Illustrator.
Although each lesson provides step-by-step instructions for creating a specific project, there's room for exploration and experimentation. You can follow the book from start to finish, or do only the lessons that correspond to your interests and needs. Each lesson concludes with a review section summarizing what you've covered.

Prerequisites
Before beginning to use Adobe Illustrator CC Classroom in a Book (2014 release), you should have working knowledge of your computer and its operating system. Make sure that you know how to use the mouse and standard menus and commands, and also how to open, save, and close files. If you need to review these techniques, see the printed or online documentation for your Windows or Mac OS.


 Note
When instructions differ by platform, Mac OS commands appear first, and then the Windows commands, with the platform noted in parentheses. For example, "press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and click away from the artwork."


Installing the program
Before you begin using Adobe Illustrator CC Classroom in a Book (2014 release), make sure that your system is set up correctly and that you've installed the required software and hardware.

You must purchase the Adobe Illustrator CC software separately. For complete instructions on installing the software, visit helpx.adobe.com/illustrator.html. You must install Illustrator from Adobe Creative Cloud onto your hard disk. Follow the onscreen instructions.

Fonts used in this book
The Classroom in a Book lesson files use fonts that are a part of the Typekit Portfolio plan included with your Creative Cloud subscription, and trial Creative Cloud members have access to a selection of fonts from Typekit for web and desktop use.

For more information about fonts and installation, see the Adobe Illustrator CC Read Me file on the web at helpx.adobe.com/illustrator.html.

Accessing the Classroom in a Book files
In order to work through the projects in this book, you will need to download the lesson files from peachpit.com. You can download the files for individual lessons, or download them all in a single file. Although each lesson stands alone, some lessons use files from other lessons, so you'll need to keep the entire collection of lesson assets on your computer as you work through the book.

To access the Classroom in a Book files:
1. On a Mac or PC, go to www.peachpit.com/redeem and enter the code found at the back of your book.
2. If you do not have a Peachpit.com account, you will be prompted to create one.
3. The downloadable files will be listed under Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page.
4. Click the lesson file links to download them to your computer. The files are compressed into Zip archives to speed up download time and to protect the contents from damage during transfer. You must uncompress (or "unzip") the files to restore them to their original size and format before you use them with the book. Modern Mac and Windows systems are set up to open Zip archives by simply double-clicking.
5. On your hard drive, create a new folder in a convenient location and give it the name "Lessons," following the standard procedure for your operating system:
• If you're running Windows, right-click and choose New > Folder. Then enter the new name for your folder.
• If you're using Mac OS, in the Finder, choose File > New Folder. Type the new name and drag the folder to the location you want to use.
6. Drag the unzipped Lessons folder (which contains folders named Lesson01, Lesson02, and so on) that you downloaded onto your hard drive to your new folder named "Lessons." When you begin each lesson, navigate to the folder with that lesson number to access all the assets you need to complete the lesson.

Restoring default preferences
The preferences file controls how command settings appear on your screen when you open the Adobe Illustrator program. Each time you quit Adobe Illustrator, the position of the panels and certain command settings are recorded in different preference files. If you want to restore the tools and settings to their original default settings, you can delete the current Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. Adobe Illustrator creates a new preferences file, if one doesn't already exist, the next time you start the program and save a file.

You must restore the default preferences for Illustrator before you begin each lesson. This ensures that the tools and panels function as described in this book. When you have finished the book, you can restore your saved settings, if you like.

To delete or save the current Illustrator preferences file
1. Exit Adobe Illustrator CC.

2. Locate the Adobe Illustrator Prefs file as follows:
• (Mac OS 10.7 and later**) The Adobe Illustrator Prefs file is located in the folder [startup drive]/Users/[username]/Library/Preferences/Adobe Illustrator 18 Settings/en_US*.
• (Windows 7 [Service Pack 1], or Windows 8) The Adobe Illustrator Prefs file is located in the folder [startup drive]\Users\[username]\AppData\Roaming\Adobe\Adobe Illustrator 18 Settings\en_US*\x86 or x64.
* Folder name may be different depending on the language version you have installed.
** On Mac OS 10.7 (Lion) and later, the Library folder is hidden by default. To access this folder, in Finder, choose Go > Go To Folder. Type ~/Library in the Go To The Folder dialog box and then click Go.

 Note
In Windows 7 or later, the AppData folder is hidden by default. To make it visible, open Folder Options in Control Panel and click the View tab. In the Advanced Settings pane, find Hidden Files and folders and select Show Hidden Files and Folders or Show hidden files, folders, or drives.


 Note
If you cannot locate the preferences file, try using your operating system's Find command, and search for "Adobe Illustrator Prefs."

If you can't find the file, you either haven't started Adobe Illustrator CC yet or you have moved the preferences file. The preferences file is created after you quit the program the first time and is updated thereafter.

 Tip
To quickly locate and delete the Adobe Illustrator preferences file each time you begin a new lesson, create a shortcut (Windows) or an alias (Mac OS) to the Adobe Illustrator 18 Settings folder.

3. Copy the file and save it to another folder on your hard disk (if you wish to restore those preferences) or Delete it.
4. Start Adobe Illustrator CC. You most likely will see a dialog box that asks if you would like to use the settings from the cloud. Click Disable Sync Settings.

To restore saved preferences after completing the lessons
1. Exit Adobe Illustrator CC.

2. Delete the current preferences file. Find the original preferences file that you saved and move it to the Adobe Illustrator 18 Settings folder.

 Note
You can move the original preferences file rather than renaming it.


Additional resources
Adobe Illustrator CC Classroom in a Book (2014 release) is not meant to replace documentation that comes with the program or to be a comprehensive reference for every feature. Only the commands and options used in the lessons are explained in this book. For comprehensive information about program features and tutorials, please refer to these resources:

Adobe Illustrator Help and Support: helpx.adobe.com/illustrator.html is where you can find and browse Help and Support content on adobe.com. Adobe Illustrator Help and Adobe Illustrator Support Center are accessible from the Help menu in Illustrator CC 2014 (2014 release) or by pressing F1.
Adobe Creative Cloud Learning: for inspiration, key techniques, cross-product workflows, and updates on new features go to the Creative Cloud Learn page helpx.adobe.com/creative-cloud/learn/tutorials.html. Available to all.
Adobe Forums: forums.adobe.com lets you tap into peer-to-peer discussions, questions and answers on Adobe products.
Adobe TV: tv.adobe.com is an online video resource for expert instruction and inspiration about Adobe products, including a How To channel to get you started with your product.
Adobe Inspire: www.adobe.com/inspire.html offers thoughtful articles on design and design issues, a gallery showcasing the work of top-notch designers, tutorials, and more.
Resources for educators: www.adobe.com/education and edex.adobe.com offer a treasure trove of information for instructors who teach classes on Adobe software. Find solutions for education at all levels, including free curricula that use an integrated approach to teaching Adobe software and can be used to prepare for the Adobe Certified Associate exams.
Also check out these useful links:
Adobe Illustrator CC product home page: www.adobe.com/products/illustrator
Adobe Add-ons: creative.adobe.com/addons is a central resource for finding tools, services, extensions, code samples, and more to supplement and extend your Adobe products.

Adobe Authorized Training Centers
Adobe Authorized Training Centers offer instructor-led courses and training on Adobe products. A directory of AATCs is available at partners.adobe.com.


Sync settings using Adobe Creative Cloud
When you work on multiple machines, managing and syncing preferences, presets, and libraries among the machines can be time-consuming, complex, and prone to error. The Sync Settings feature enables individual users to sync their preferences, presets, and libraries to the Creative Cloud. This means that if you use two machines, say one at home and the other at work, the Sync Settings feature makes it easy for you to keep those settings synchronized across two machines. Also, if you have replaced your old machine with a new one and have re-installed Illustrator, this feature will let you bring back all those settings on the new machine.


For more information about syncing, visit helpx.adobe.com/illustrator/using/sync-settings.html







What's New in Adobe Illustrator CC (2014 release)
Adobe® Illustrator® CC (2014 release) is packed with new and innovative features to help you produce artwork more efficiently for print, Web, and digital video publication. In this section, you'll learn about many of these new features—how they function and how you can use them in your work.

Creative Cloud Libraries
With Creative Cloud Libraries, you can organize creative assets, such as colors, type styles, brushes and graphics, and automatically sync them to Creative Cloud, allowing you to access them whenever and wherever you need them from a single, convenient panel within Illustrator. Libraries make it easy to maintain design consistency across projects, and not have to dig around in files and folders to find the assets you need.



Curvature tool
With the new Curvature tool (), you can draw and edit paths quickly and visually to create paths with smooth refined curves and straight lines. Click once to place points and see the drawing curve "flex" around the points dynamically. Double-click to create corner points for straight lines.


Edit paths while drawing or after the path is complete using the same tool; no need to hassle with anchor points and handles. Just by clicking or double-clicking on the curvature points creates smooth points or corner points at any time. But if you need the fine control you're used to with traditional anchor points and handles, just edit your drawing with any of the Illustrator path editing tools.

Touch workspace
The Touch workspace lets you create on the go what you could once only accomplish sitting at your desk: it's Illustrator you can take with you. Designed for Windows 8 tablets, the Touch workspace surfaces the essential tools and controls for drawing and editing with a pressure-sensitive pen and multi-touch gestures. You can create logos, icons, explore custom lettering and typography, create UI wireframes, and more.

The Touch workspace brings traditional drawing templates and French curves to the Illustrator workspace. These templates and curves project a scalable, movable outline that can be traced against to quickly create refined curves. At any time, you can immediately switch between the Touch and traditional workspaces to access the full range of Illustrator tools and controls.

Area type Autosizing
With area type Autosizing, you can automatically resize the height of area type frames when you add, delete, or edit text. As the text is edited and re-edited, the frame shrinks and grows to accommodate the changing amount of copy, and eliminates overset text without manually sizing and resizing frames. You can easily toggle Autosizing on or off, so it's there when it's needed and off when it's not, e.g., when main text flows, or threads, across layout elements like columns or artboards.



Live Shapes
All rectangles and rounded rectangles have modifiable corners. While each corner can have an independent radius value, all attributes are retained even when you scale or rotate the rectangle. Rectangles and rounded rectangles now remember all modifications made, be it width, height, rotation, corner treatment. This capability means you can always return to the original shape of the object.



Typekit integration
When you open an Illustrator artwork file, and find fonts missing, the online Typekit desktop font library is automatically searched for the missing font (you must have an Internet connection for this function). If the missing font is available online, you have the option of syncing it to your current computer. If you choose not to fix the missing fonts when the file is opened in Illustrator, text elements using unavailable fonts are highlighted in pink and rendered using a default font.



Pen tool preview and drawing-related enhancements
The Pen tool displays a preview of what will be drawn on your artboard before you click and drop the next point. This helps you visualize the next curve before you commit to the next point and saves you the time spent in drawing, reviewing, and then redrawing paths that need to be redone.



Pencil tool enhancements
The Pencil tool has been updated with an additional Fidelity setting for finer control over the paths you draw. This additional level has been extended to the Paintbrush and Blob Brush tools as well.


Path segment reshaping
Drag path segments into the shape you desire. New path reshaping technology, available in the Anchor Point and Direct Selection tools and accessible from the Pen tool, provides a more direct and intuitive way to edit path segments.



Join tool
Use the Join tool () to intelligently join paths that cross, overlap, or have open ends without affecting the original paths. Using the same tool, you can simultaneously join paths and trim unwanted segments using intuitive scrubbing gestures.



Other enhancements
• Windows GPU acceleration—New GPU acceleration for Windows lets you work faster on Windows 7 or 8 computers. This feature requires an Adobe-certified NVIDIA graphics card with at least 1GB of VRAM.

• SVG enhancements—In the SVG Save Options dialog, the "Use <textPath>..." check box is selected by default. This reduces generated markup, resulting in smaller SVG output files. Markup for generated preview HTML has also been cleaned up.
• Anchor point enhancements—Fine adjustment of curves is now easier. New anchor point controls allow unequal or different-direction handles to be dragged as you draw to control the smoothness of each segment. You can even change a corner point to smooth without ruining your shape.
• Custom Tools panels—Create specialized Tools panels by dragging and dropping just the tools you need—like drawing, editing, or selection tools—into a custom panel. The full Tools panel can then be hidden, allowing for a clean, efficient workspace.
• Settings import and export—Share your Illustrator settings across multiple computers. Simply export them to a folder where they can then be imported by other users. While Sync Settings lets you standardize settings on your own computers, now you can also share them across your organization.
Although this list touches on just a few of the new and enhanced features of Illustrator CC (2014 release), it exemplifies Adobe's commitment to providing the best tools possible for your publishing needs. We hope you enjoy working with Illustrator CC (2014 release) as much as we do.
—The Adobe Illustrator CC (2014 release) Classroom in a Book Team







A Quick Tour of Adobe® Illustrator® CC (2014 release)

Lesson overview
In this interactive demonstration of Adobe Illustrator CC (2014 release), you'll get an overview of the main features of the application.

This lesson takes approximately 60 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



In this demonstration of Adobe Illustrator CC, you will be introduced to some key fundamentals for working in the application.


Getting started
For the first lesson of this book, you will get a quick tour of the tools and features in Adobe Illustrator CC, offering a sense of the many possibilities. Along the way, you will create artwork for an amusement park.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See "Getting Started" at the beginning of the book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.

Creating a new document
An Illustrator document can contain up to 100 artboards (artboards are similar to pages in a program like Adobe InDesign®). Next, you will create a document with only one artboard.


 Note
Learn more about creating and editing artboards in Lesson 4, "Transforming Artwork."

1. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the Workspace menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

2. Choose File > New.
3. In the New Document dialog box, change only the following options (leaving the rest at their default settings):
• Name: AmusementWorld
• Units: Inches
• Width: 16 in
• Height: 14 in
4. Click OK. A new blank document appears.


Sync settings using Adobe Creative Cloud™
When you launch Adobe Illustrator CC for the first time, with no previous sync information available, you will see a prompt asking whether you want to start a sync with Adobe Creative Cloud.

• Click Disable Sync Settings (if the dialog box appears).

 Note
For more information on syncing with the Creative Cloud, see "Sync settings using Adobe Creative Cloud" in the Getting Started section of this book.

1. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, leave the name as AmusementWorld.ai and navigate to the Lessons > Lesson00 folder. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.
2. Choose View > Rulers > Show Rulers to show rulers in the Document window.
3. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, and then choose View > Zoom Out. The white area is the artboard, and where your printable artwork will go.

Drawing shapes
Drawing shapes is the cornerstone of Illustrator, and you will create many of them in the coming lessons. Next, you will create several shapes.

1. Select the Rectangle tool () in the Tools panel on the left.

 Note
Learn more about creating and editing shapes in Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."

2. Position the pointer in the upper-left corner of the artboard (see the red X in the figure). When the word "intersect" appears next to the pointer, click and drag down and to the right edge of the white artboard. When the gray measurement label shows a width of 16 in and a height of 14 in, release the mouse button.


 Note
If the Transform panel opens, click the "x" in the corner of the Transform panel group to close it.

3. Click and hold down on the Rectangle tool in the Tools panel. Click to select the Ellipse tool ().

4. Click roughly in the center of the artboard to open the Ellipse dialog box. Change the Width to 7.6 in and the Height value to 7.6 in by typing in the values. Click OK to create a circle that will become the world. Leave the circle selected.


 Tip
You can also click the Constrain Width And Height Proportions button () to change both values together.


Applying color
Applying colors to artwork is a common Illustrator task. Experimenting and applying color is easy using the Color panel, Swatches panel, Color Guide panel, and Edit Colors/Recolor Artwork dialog box.


 Note
Learn more about creating and applying color in Lesson 6, "Using Color and Patterns to Enhance Signage."

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel on the left. With the circle still selected, click the Fill color in the Control panel (circled in the figure) to reveal the Swatches panel. Position the pointer over a blue swatch (in the second row of colors). When the tool tip appears that shows "C=85, M=50, Y=0, K=0," click to apply the blue swatch to the fill.

2. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.
3. Click the Stroke color in the Control panel (circled in the figure). Click the None color () to remove the stroke (border) of the circle. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.

4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Working with layers
Layers allow you to organize and more easily select artwork. Next, using the Layers panel, you will organize your artwork.


 Note
Learn more about working with layers and the Layers panel in Lesson 8, "Organizing Your Artwork with Layers."

1. Choose Window > Layers to show the Layers panel in the workspace.
2. Double-click directly on the text "Layer 1" (the layer name) in the Layers panel. Type Background, and press Enter or Return to change the layer name.
Naming layers can be helpful when organizing content. Currently, all artwork is on this layer.

3. Click the Create New Layer button () at the bottom of the Layers panel. Double-click "Layer 2" (the new layer name), and type Content. Press Enter or Return.

4. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the blue circle. Choose Edit > Cut.
5. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
6. Click once on the layer named Content to select it in the Layers panel. New artwork is added to the selected layer.
7. Choose Edit > Paste to paste the circle on the selected layer (Content), in the center of the artboard.

8. Choose Select > Deselect.

Drawing with the Pencil tool
The Pencil tool () lets you draw free-form open and closed paths that contain curves and straight lines. As you draw with the Pencil tool, anchor points are created on the path where necessary and according to the Pencil tool options you set.


 Note
Learn more about working with the Pencil tool and other drawing tools in Lesson 5, "Creating an Illustration with the Drawing Tools."

1. Double-click the Pencil tool () in the Tools panel on the left to open the Pencil Tool Options dialog box. Drag the Fidelity slider all the way to the right (to Smooth). Click OK.
Changing the Fidelity will help to smooth out the path as you draw.

2. Press the letter D to set the default fill (White) and stroke (Black) for the artwork you are about to create.
3. Choose Window > Swatches to show the Swatches panel. Click the Fill box (circled in the figure) and select the None () swatch to remove the fill. Leave the Swatches panel open.

Next, you'll create a figure similar to the one shown below. The path you draw won't match exactly as shown, and that's okay.
4. On the artboard, starting where you see the red X in the figure, click and drag to create a path around the blue circle. Draw all the way around the blue circle and come back close to where you started drawing. Make sure that you don't see a circle () next to the Pencil tool, indicating that the path will be closed. If you see the circle next to the Pencil, release the mouse button, press Delete and try the path again. Release the mouse button to stop drawing the path.

5. Leave the path selected.

Editing strokes
In addition to changing the color of strokes, you can also format them in many other ways. That's what you'll do next with the path you just drew.


 Note
Learn more about working with strokes in Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."

1. With the path still selected, click the word "Stroke" in the Control panel above the document to open the Stroke panel. Change the following options:
• Stroke Weight: 60 pt
• Dashed Line: Selected
• Dash: 28 pt
• Gap: 3 pt

2. Press the Escape key to hide the Stroke panel.
3. In the Swatches panel, click the Stroke box, and then select the "CMYK Red" swatch in the first row of colors. Leave the shape selected.


Working with the Width tool
The Width tool () allows you to create a variable width stroke and to save the width as a profile that can be applied to other objects. Next, you'll change the width of the red path.


 Note
Learn more about the Width tool in Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."

1. Select the Width tool () in the Tools panel. Position the pointer over the left side of the red path (see the figure). When the pointer shows a plus sign (+) next to it, drag toward the center of the path. When the gray measurement label next to the pointer shows a Width of approximately 0.2 in, release the mouse button.


 Note
A width point is created on the path where you dragged. This allows you to edit that width at any time.

2. Position the pointer at the bottom of the path on the curve (see the figure below). When the pointer shows a plus sign (+) next to it, drag away from the red path. When the gray measurement label shows a Width of approximately 0.5 in, release the mouse button.

 Tip
You can always choose Edit > Undo Width Point Change to remove the last point and try again.

3. Move to the right side of the path and drag away from the path to make the stroke wider (see the second part of the following figure).
4. Move to the top loop and drag toward the path to make the width narrower (see the third part of the following figure).

5. Try editing other parts of the path and see how it is affected. Use the next figure as a reference for how we adjusted the rest of the path. If you edit a part of the path and don't like the edit, you can choose Edit > Undo Width Point Change and try it again.

6. With the path still selected, choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to send it behind the blue circle.


Creating shapes using the Shape Builder tool
The Shape Builder tool () is an interactive tool for creating complex shapes by merging and erasing simpler shapes. Next, you will finish a castle tower using the Shape Builder tool.


 Note
Learn more about working with the Shape Builder tool in Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."

1. Choose File > Open, and open the Pieces.ai file in the Lessons > Lesson00 folder on your hard disk.
The Pieces.ai file contains a series of individual shapes (rectangles) that make up a tower and a group of shapes that make a flag. You'll finish the tower by combining the shapes using the Shape Builder tool.
2. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select the tower shapes. The flag shapes are locked, which means they can't be selected without unlocking them.
3. Select the Shape Builder tool () in the Tools panel on the left. Position the pointer to the left and above all of the selected shapes (see the red X in the figure). Press the Shift key and drag to the right and down. Make sure you don't drag across the green rectangle, otherwise it will be added to the other shapes (see the figure). Release the mouse button and then the Shift key to combine the shapes.

4. Position the pointer over the green rectangle. Holding down the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, when you see a mesh pattern appear in the fill of the object, click to subtract the highlighted green shape from the larger tower shape.

5. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel on the left, and in the Swatches panel, click the Fill box (if needed) and choose the purple/blue color with the yellow tool tip that shows as "C=100, M=100, Y=25, K=25."


Copying content
In Illustrator, there are a lot of ways to copy content. In this section, you will use several methods for copying content between documents and in a single document.

1. Choose Object > Unlock All to unlock the flag.
2. Choose Select > All On Active Artboard to select all of the shapes.
3. Choose Edit > Copy.
4. Choose File > Close to close the file without saving.
5. With the AmusementWorld.ai file showing, choose Edit Paste to paste the artwork into the center of the Document window.
6. Choose Select > Deselect.
7. With the Selection tool () selected in the Tools panel, click and drag the tower shape to position it like you see in the figure. Leave it selected.
As you drag, you will see green alignment guides and a gray measurement label. These are a part of the Smart Guides feature you will learn about in a later lesson.

8. With the tower artwork still selected, Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) a copy of the tower to the right and position it like you see in the figure. Release the mouse button and then the key.

9. Choose Edit > Copy, and then choose Edit > Paste to paste a copy in the center of the Document window.
10. Drag the tower up like in the next figure.
11. In the Swatches panel (Window > Swatches), click the Fill box and select the White swatch.

12. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to send the white tower behind the other artwork.

Working with symbols
A symbol is a reusable art object stored in the Symbols panel. You will now create a symbol from artwork.


 Note
Learn more about working with symbols in Lesson 13, "Using Symbols to Create a Map."

1. Click the flag artwork you pasted previously.
2. Choose Window > Symbols to open the Symbols panel. Click the New Symbol button () at the bottom of the Symbols panel.

3. In the Symbol Options dialog box that appears, name the symbol Flag, and click OK.
The artwork now appears as a saved symbol in the Symbols panel, and the flag artwork on the artboard you used to create the symbol is now a symbol instance.
4. Choose View > Outline to see the artwork without fills. Drag the flag by the stroke (border), up to the top of the white tower.
You'll need to select the flag by the stroke (border) since there is no fill to click on in Outline mode.

5. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back.
6. Choose View > Preview.
7. From the Symbols panel, drag the Flag symbol thumbnail onto the artboard like you see in the figure. Drag one more Flag symbol from the Symbols panel onto the artboard and position it like you see in the figure. Leave the last symbol instance on the artboard selected.


 Note
Your Flag symbol instances may be in different locations than those in the figure. That's okay.

8. With one of the flags selected, click the Edit Symbol button in the Control panel above the artwork. This allows you to edit the symbol artwork in Isolation mode without affecting the other artwork.
9. In the dialog box that appears, click OK.

10. Click the gray flag shape on the artboard. Click the Fill color in the Control panel and select the yellow swatch with the tool tip that shows "C=0, M=10, Y=95, K=0" to change the fill color of the flag. Press the Escape key to close the Swatches panel.
11. Press the Escape key to exit the editing (Isolation) mode and notice that the other flags have changed.

 Tip
You can also double-click away from the selected artwork to exit Isolation mode.

12. Click one of the blue towers, and then Shift-click the other blue tower to select both. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to arrange the towers on top of the flags.
13. Click the blue circle, and choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to place the circle on the towers. Drag it into position like you see in the figure.


Placing images in Illustrator
In Illustrator, you can place raster images, like JPEG (jpg, jpeg, jpe) and Adobe Photoshop® (psd, pdd) files, and either link to them or embed them. Next, you will place an image of a map.


 Note
Learn more about placing images in Lesson 14, "Using Illustrator CC with Other Adobe Applications."

1. Choose File > Place. In the Place dialog box, navigate to the Lesson00 folder in the Lessons folder and select the Map.psd file. Make sure that the Link option in the dialog box is selected, and click Place.

2. Click to place the map on the artboard. Drag the map over the blue circle so it is positioned roughly like you see in the figure.

3. Choose File > Save.

Using Image Trace
You can use Image Trace to convert photographs (raster images) into vector artwork. Next, you will trace the Photoshop file.


 Note
Learn more about Image Trace in Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."

1. Choose Window > Image Trace to open the Image Trace panel.
2. In the Image Trace panel, choose "3 Colors" from the Preset menu.
The image is converted to vector paths, but it is not yet editable.
3. In the Image Trace panel, click the toggle arrow to the left of Advanced. Select Ignore White near the bottom of the panel. Close the Image Trace panel by clicking the small "x" in the corner.

4. With the map still selected, click the Expand button in the Control panel to make the object editable artwork.
The map image is now a series of vector shapes that are grouped together.
5. Choose Object > Arrange > Send Backward to put the map behind the blue circle.
6. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

Creating a clipping mask
A clipping mask is an object that masks other artwork so that only areas that lie within its shape are visible—in effect, clipping the artwork to the shape of the mask. Next, you will copy the blue circle and use the copy to mask the map.


 Note
Learn more about working with clipping masks in Lesson 14, "Using Illustrator CC with Other Adobe Applications."

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click the blue circle.
2. Choose Edit > Copy, and then choose Edit > Paste In Front to paste a copy of the circle directly on top of the original circle.
3. With the circle still selected, press the Shift key, and click the map artwork to select it as well.
4. Choose Object > Clipping Mask > Make.


Creating and editing gradients
Gradients are color blends of two or more colors that you can apply to the fill or stroke of artwork. Next, you will apply a gradient to the background shape.


 Note
Learn more about working with gradients in Lesson 9, "Blending Colors and Shapes."

1. Click the white rectangle in the background to select it.
2. Choose Window > Gradient to show the Gradient panel on the right side of the workspace. In the Gradient panel, change the following options:
• Click the white Fill box (circled in the figure), if it's not already selected, so that you can apply the gradient to the fill of the rectangle shape.
• Click the Gradient menu button () to the left of the word "Type," and choose "White, Black" from the menu.
• Choose 90 from the Angle menu.

3. Drag the white color stop in the Gradient panel (see the figure below) to the right until the Location value below it shows roughly 50%.
4. Double-click the black color stop on the right side of the gradient slider in the Gradient panel (circled in the figure below). In the panel that appears, click the Color button () (if it's not already selected), and change the color values to C=75, M=0, Y=15, K=0. Press the Escape key to hide the Color panel.

5. Click the Stroke color in the Control panel (circled in the figure). Click the None color () to remove the stroke (border) of the rectangle (if necessary). Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.

Next, you'll create a circle and apply a transparent gradient on the world.
6. Click within the green of the map artwork, and choose Object > Lock > Selection.
7. Click again on the map, and you will select the blue circle behind it since the map artwork is locked and can't be selected.
8. Choose Edit > Copy, and then Edit > Paste In Place to paste it on top of all other artwork.
9. In the Gradient panel, change the following options:
• Click the Fill box (circled in the figure), if it's not already selected, so that you can apply the gradient to the fill of the rectangle shape.
• Click the Gradient menu button () to the left of the word "Type," and choose "White, Black" from the menu.
• Choose Radial from the Type menu.

10. Double-click the black color stop on the right side of the gradient slider in the Gradient panel (circled in the figure). In the panel that appears, click the Swatches button (), and select the white swatch. Change the Opacity to 0. Press Enter or Return to hide the Color panel.

11. Select the Gradient tool () in the Tools panel on the left. Click and drag across the circle, starting at the red X in the figure, to reposition and resize the gradient.

12. Choose Object > Lock > Selection to lock the gradient circle.

Working with type
Next, you will add some text to the project and apply formatting. You will choose a Typekit font that requires an Internet connection. If you don't have an Internet connection, you can choose another font.


 Note
Learn more about working with type in Lesson 7, "Adding Type to a Poster."

1. Select the Type tool () in the Tools panel on the left, and click in a blank area of the artboard. Type Amusement Park.
2. With the cursor still in the text, choose Select > All to select it.
3. In the Control panel above the artwork, type 73 pt in the Font Size field (to the right of the Font Family), and press the Enter or Return key.


 Tip
If you don't see the character options like font size in the Control panel, click the word "Character" to see the Character panel.

4. Click the Fill color in the Control panel above the artwork and choose the purple/blue color with the yellow tool tip that shows as "C=100, M=100, Y=25, K=25."
Next, you will apply a Typekit font. You will need an Internet connection. If you don't have an Internet connection or access to the Typekit fonts, you can choose any other font from the font menu.
5. Click the arrow to the right of the Font field. Click the Add Fonts From Typekit button to sync a font from Typekit. This opens a browser, launches the Typekit.com website, and signs you in to the site.

6. In the browser, click the Sans Serif button to sort the listing of fonts and make sure that the Desktop Use button is selected. Choose Name from the Sort By field to sort the fonts alphabetically.


 Note
If you are taken to the Typekit.com home page, you can simply click the Browse Fonts button. It may also ask you to login with your Adobe ID.

7. Find Azo Sans Uber in the list (or another font, if you don't see that one). Hover over it and click +Use Fonts.

8. Click Sync Selected Fonts in the window that appears.

9. After it is synced, click the Launch The Creative Cloud Application button to open the Creative Cloud Desktop application.
In the Creative Cloud desktop application, you will be able to see any messages indicating that font syncing is turned off (turn it on in that case) or any other issues.

10. Return to Illustrator. With the text still selected, in the Font field in the Control panel, begin typing Azo.


 Note
It may take a few minutes for the font to sync with your computer.

11. Click Azo Sans Uber Regular in the menu that appears to apply the font.
12. Select the Selection tool (), and drag the text roughly into position over the world, like you see in the figure and leave it selected.


Warping text
Next, you will see how you can warp text into different shapes using a preset envelope warp.

1. With the text object still selected, choose Object > Envelope Distort > Make With Warp.

 Note
Learn more about working with a warp in Lesson 7, "Adding Type to a Poster."

2. In the Warp Options dialog box, make sure that Arc is chosen from the Style menu. Change the Bend to 36% and select Preview. Click OK.


Working with brushes
Brushes let you stylize the appearance of paths. You can apply brush strokes to existing paths, or you can use the Paintbrush tool () to draw a path and apply a brush stroke simultaneously.


 Note
Learn more about working with brushes in Lesson 10, "Using Brushes to Create a Poster."

1. Select the Line Segment tool () in the Tools panel on the left. Pressing the Shift key, click and drag from the left side of the artboard (see the red X in the figure) to the right. When the gray measurement label shows a width of roughly 15.3 in, release the mouse button and then the key.

2. Choose Window > Brush Libraries > Decorative > Decorative_Banners And Seals to open the brush library as a panel.
3. Click the Banner 1 brush in the panel to apply it to the path. Click the "x" in the corner of the Decorative_Banners And Seals panel to close it.

4. Change the Stroke weight to 5 pt in the Control panel above the artwork.
The brush is an art brush, which means that it stretches the banner artwork (in this case) along the path.

5. Choose Object > Arrange > Send Backward to arrange the banner behind the text.
6. Select the Selection tool () and drag both into position like you see in the figure.
