1. Select the Zoom tool () and click three times on the gray collar (top part of the shirt) for the Front shirt to zoom in.
2. Choose View > Outline. This displays the artwork so that only its outlines (or paths) are visible and you can see the "TEE" text that is hidden.

3. Choose View > Preview.
Sometimes, you may want to view part of the artwork in outline mode, while retaining the strokes and fills for the rest of the artwork. This can be useful if you need to see all artwork in a given layer, sublayer, or group.

 Tip
To view layer artwork in Outline mode, you can also double-click either the layer thumbnail or just to the right of the layer name to open the Layer Options dialog box. You can then deselect Preview and click OK.

4. In the Layers panel, click the disclosure triangle for the "Shirt Front" layer to reveal the layer content. Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) the eye icon () to the left of the "Front Collar" layer name to show the content for that layer in Outline mode.

Displaying a layer in Outline mode is also useful for selecting the anchor points or center points on objects.
5. Attempt to click the "TEE" text and you will most likely select the group of content that is on top of it.
6. Click the Locate Object () button at the bottom of the Layers panel to see where the selected group is in the Layers panel. Drag the left edge of the Layers panel to the left so you can see more of the layer names.
7. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to send the group to the bottom of the "Front Collar" layer.
8. Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) the eye icon () to the left of the "Front Collar" layer name to show the content for that layer in Preview mode again.
9. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
10. Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the eye icon () to the left of the "Shirt Back" layer to hide the other layers.

 Note
This will hide and show all other layers, even sublayers on the "Shirt Back" layer.

Hiding all layers except those that you want to work with can be very useful.
11. Choose Show All Layers from the Layers panel menu ().
12. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of each of the layers to ensure that they are all closed.

Applying appearance attributes to layers
You can apply appearance attributes, such as styles, effects, and transparency, to layers, groups, and objects, using the Layers panel. When an appearance attribute is applied to a layer, any object on that layer takes on that attribute. If an appearance attribute is applied only to a specific object on a layer, it affects only that object, not the entire layer.


 Note
To learn more about working with appearance attributes, see Lesson 11, "Exploring Creative Uses of Effects and Graphic Styles."

You will apply an effect to an object on one layer, and then you'll copy that effect to another layer to change all objects on that layer.
1. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of the "Pattern Front" layer name to show its contents, and then click the target icon () to the right of the print1 layer in the target column.


 Note
Clicking the target icon also selects the object(s) on the artboard. You could simply select the content on the artboard to apply an effect.

Clicking the target icon indicates that you want to apply an effect, style, or transparency change to that layer, sublayer, group, or object. In other words, the layer, sublayer, group, or object is targeted. The content is also selected in the Document window. When the target button appears as a double-ring icon (either  or ), the item is targeted; a single-ring icon indicates that the item is not targeted.
2. Click the Opacity link in the Control panel to show the Transparency panel. Choose Overlay from the Blending Mode menu, which shows as Normal by default.
For the print1 layer, the target icon () is now shaded, indicating that the layer has at least one appearance attribute (a blending mode) applied to it.

3. Click the target icon () to the right of the print2 layer in the target column. Click the Opacity link in the Control panel to show the Transparency panel. Choose Luminosity from the Blending Mode menu, which shows as Normal by default. Change the Opacity to 20.

4. Choose Select > Deselect.

Creating a clipping mask
The Layers panel lets you create clipping masks to control whether artwork on a layer (or in a group) is hidden or revealed. A clipping mask is an object or group of objects that masks (with its shape) artwork below it in the same layer or sublayer, so that only artwork within the shape is visible. In Lesson 14, "Using Illustrator CC with Other Adobe Applications," you will learn about creating clipping masks that are independent of the Layers panel.

Now you'll create a clipping mask for the pattern for each shirt. As you create the clipping mask, you'll learn about working with Isolation mode so that you can focus on specific parts of the artwork.
1. Click the disclosure triangle to the left of all main layers to hide their content.
2. Select the layer named "Pattern Front" and choose Enter Isolation Mode from the Layers panel menu ().

When a layer is in Isolation mode, objects on that layer are dimmed and locked, much like when you enter Isolation mode for a group, so that you can easily edit them without affecting other layers. The Layers panel now shows a layer called Isolation Mode and a layer that contains the "Pattern Front" layer content.
3. In the Layers panel, click the disclosure triangle for the "Pattern Front" layer to reveal the layer contents. Click the selection column to the right of the "Pattern Front" layer to select all of the contents on the layer. Shift-click the selection column to the right of the <Path> object (the shirt shape) to deselect it.

4. With the Selection tool selected, drag any of the selected shapes on the artboard to the left and onto the shirt shape until it's positioned roughly as in the figure.

In the Layers panel, a masking object must be above the objects it masks. You can create a clipping mask for an entire layer, a sublayer, or a group of objects. Because you want to mask the content in the "Pattern Front" layer, the clipping object needs to be at the top of the "Pattern Front" layer, which is what you did in the previous section.
5. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back.

 Note
Deselecting the artwork on the artboard is not necessary to complete the next steps, but it can be helpful for viewing the artwork.

The white shirt shape will now be on top of the pattern artwork on the "Pattern Front" layer.
6. Select the "Pattern Front" layer to highlight it in the Layers panel. Click the Make/Release Clipping Mask button () at the bottom of the Layers panel.

The name of the <Path> sublayer is underlined to indicate that it is the masking shape and it has been renamed to "Clipping Path." On the artboard, the <Path> sublayer has hidden the parts of the pattern content that extended outside of the shape.

 Tip
To release the clipping mask, you can select the "Pattern Front" layer again and click the same Make/Release Clipping Mask button ().

7. Click the selection column for the Clipping Path layer to select the shirt path. Change the Fill color to Black in the Control panel.

8. Press the Escape key to exit Isolation mode.

 Note
You can also double-click in a blank area of the artboard to exit Isolation mode.

Next, you will practice creating a clipping mask by performing the same steps on the Back shirt.
9. Click the print1 layer and Shift-click the print3 layer to select all three layers.
10. Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) any of the layers to the "Pattern Back" layer to copy them there.
11. Select the "Pattern Back" layer and choose Enter Isolation Mode from the Layers panel menu ().

12. Drag a selection marquee across the pattern objects to select them all. Begin dragging to the right, and as you drag, press the Shift key to constrain the movement. Drag them into position like you see in the figure.

13. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to put the pattern content behind the white shirt.
14. Select the "Pattern Back" layer to highlight it in the Layers panel. Click the Make/Release Clipping Mask button () at the bottom of the Layers panel.
15. Click the selection column for the "Clipping Path" layer to select the shirt path. Change the Fill color to Black in the Control panel.
16. Double-click in a blank area of the artboard to exit Isolation mode.

Now that the artwork is complete, you may want to combine all the layers into a single layer, and then delete the empty layers. This is called flattening artwork. Delivering finished artwork in a single-layer file can prevent accidents, such as hiding layers or omitting parts of the artwork during printing. To flatten specific layers without deleting hidden layers, you can select the layers you want to flatten, and then choose Merge Selected from the Layers panel menu.

 Note
For a complete list of shortcuts that you can use with the Layers panel, see "Keyboard shortcuts" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

17. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.

Review questions
1. Name at least two benefits of using layers when creating artwork.

2. How do you hide layers? How do you show individual layers?
3. Describe how to reorder layers in a file.
4. What is the purpose of changing the color for a layer?
5. What happens if you paste a layered file into another file? Why is the "Paste Remembers Layers" option useful?
6. How do you create a layer clipping mask?
7. How do you apply an effect to a layer? How can you edit that effect?

Review answers
1. The benefits of using layers when creating artwork include: organizing content, selecting content more easily, protecting artwork that you don't want to change, hiding artwork that you aren't working with so that it's not distracting, and controlling what prints.

2. To hide a layer, click to deselect the eye icon () to the left of the layer name in the Layers panel. Select the blank, leftmost column (the Visibility column) to show a layer.
3. You reorder layers by selecting a layer name in the Layers panel and dragging the layer to its new location. The order of layers in the Layers panel controls the document's layer order—topmost in the panel is frontmost in the artwork.
4. The color for a layer controls how selected anchor points and direction lines are displayed on a layer and helps you identify the different layers in your document.
5. The paste commands paste layered files or objects copied from different layers into the active layer by default. The "Paste Remembers Layers" option keeps the original layers intact when the objects are pasted.
6. Create a clipping mask on a layer by selecting the layer and clicking the Make/Release Clipping Mask button () in the Layers panel. The topmost object in the layer becomes the clipping mask.
7. Click the target icon for the layer to which you want to apply an effect. Then, choose an effect from the Effect menu or by clicking the Add New Effect button () in the Appearance panel. To edit the effect, make sure that the layer is selected, and then click the name of the effect in the Appearance panel. The effect's dialog box opens, and you can change the values.







9. Blending Colors and Shapes

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Create and save a gradient fill.
• Apply and edit a gradient on a stroke.
• Apply and edit a radial gradient.
• Add colors to a gradient.
• Adjust the direction of a gradient.
• Adjust the opacity of color in a gradient.
• Blend the shapes of objects in intermediate steps.
• Create smooth color blends between objects.
• Modify a blend and its path, shape, and color.

This lesson takes approximately 60 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



Gradient fills are graduated blends of two or more colors. Using the Gradient tool and/or the Gradient panel, you can create or modify a gradient fill or a gradient stroke. With the Blend tool, you can blend the shapes and colors of objects together into a new, blended object or a series of intermediate shapes.


Getting started
You'll explore various ways to create your own color gradients and to blend colors and shapes together using the Gradient tool, the Gradient panel, and the Blend tool.

Before you begin, you'll restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator CC. Then you'll open the finished art file for this lesson to see what you'll create.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of this book.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.
2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Choose File > Open, and open the L9_end.ai file in the Lessons > Lesson09 folder on your hard disk.

4. Choose View > Zoom Out to make the finished artwork smaller, if you want to leave it on your screen as you work. (Use the Hand tool [] to move the artwork where you want it in the window.) If you don't want to leave the document open, choose File > Close.
To begin working, you'll open an existing art file.
5. Choose File > Open, and open the L9_start.ai file in the Lesson09 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.


 Note
In Mac OS, when opening lesson files, you may need to click the round, green button in the upper-left corner of the Document window to maximize the window's size.

6. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
7. Choose File > Save As, name the file Sailing.ai, and select the Lesson09 folder in the Save As menu. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and then click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.
8. Choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher in the Application bar.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the workspace switcher menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.


Working with gradients
A gradient fill is a graduated blend of two or more colors, and it always includes a starting and an ending color. You can create different types of gradient fills in Illustrator, including linear, in which the beginning color blends into the ending color along a line, and radial, in which the beginning color radiates outward, from the center point to the ending color. You can use the gradients provided with Adobe Illustrator CC or create your own gradients and save them as swatches for later use.


 Note
The Gradient panel you see will not match the figure, and that's okay.

You can use the Gradient panel (Window > Gradient) or the Gradient tool () to apply, create, and modify gradients. In the Gradient panel, the Gradient Fill or Stroke box displays the current gradient colors and gradient type applied to the fill or stroke of an object.


A. GradientB. Fill box/Stroke boxC. Reverse GradientD. Gradient midpointE. Gradient sliderF. Color stopG. OpacityH. LocationI. Gradient typeJ. Stroke gradient typeK. AngleL. Aspect ratioM. Delete Stop

In the Gradient panel, the leftmost gradient stop (labeled F—also called a color stop) under the gradient slider marks the starting color; the right gradient stop marks the ending color. A gradient color stop is the point at which a gradient changes from one color to the next. You can add more color stops by clicking below the gradient slider. Double-clicking a color stop opens a panel where you can choose a color from swatches, color sliders, or the eyedropper.

Creating and applying a linear gradient to a fill
With the simplest, two-color linear gradient, the starting color (leftmost color stop) blends into the ending color (rightmost color stop) along a line. To begin the lesson, you'll create a gradient fill for the background shape.

1. Using the Selection tool (), click to select the large yellow rectangle in the background.
The background is painted with a yellow fill color and no stroke, as shown in the Fill and Stroke boxes toward the bottom of the Tools panel or in the Swatches panel.
2. Change the Fill color to the gradient swatch named "White, Black" in the Control panel.
The default black-and-white gradient is applied to the fill of the selected background shape.

3. Open the Gradient panel (Window > Gradient) and make sure that the Fill box is selected (circled in the figure). Double-click the white, leftmost gradient stop to select the starting color of the gradient. Click the Swatches button () in the panel that appears. Click to select the light-gray swatch named "Sky 1."

4. Press the Escape key, or click in a blank area of the Gradient panel to close the Swatches panel.
5. Double-click the black color stop on the right side of the gradient slider to edit the color (circled in the figure). In the panel that appears, click the Color button () to open the Color panel. Click the menu icon () and choose CMYK from the menu, if CMYK values aren't showing. Change the values to C=40, M=4, Y=10, and K=0. After entering the last value, click in a blank area of the Gradient panel to return to the Gradient panel.


 Tip
To move between text fields, press the Tab key. Press Enter or Return to apply the last value typed.

Next, you'll save the gradient in the Swatches panel.
6. Click the Gradient menu arrow () to the left of the word "Type:" and then click the Add To Swatches button () at the bottom of the panel that appears.

 Tip
You can also save a gradient by selecting an object with a gradient fill or stroke, clicking the Fill box or Stroke box in the Tools panel (whichever the gradient is applied to), and then clicking the New Swatch button () at the bottom of the Swatches panel.

The Gradient menu lists all the default and saved gradients that you can apply.

7. Click the Swatches panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to open the Swatches panel. In the Swatches panel, double-click the "New Gradient Swatch 1" thumbnail to open the Swatch Options dialog box.

8. In the Swatch Options dialog box, type Sky in the Swatch Name field, and then click OK.
The Swatches panel lets you sort colors based on type. So if you want to only show gradient swatches in the panel, for instance, you can temporarily sort the swatches in the panel.
9. Click the Show Swatch Kinds Menu button () at the bottom of the Swatches panel and choose Show Gradient Swatches from the menu to display only gradient swatches in the Swatches panel.

10. With the rectangle still selected on the artboard, apply some of the different gradients to the shape fill by clicking them in the Swatches panel.
11. Click the gradient named Sky (the one you just saved) in the Swatches panel to make sure it is applied before continuing to the next step.
12. Click the Show Swatch Kinds Menu button () at the bottom of the Swatches panel, and choose Show All Swatches from the menu.
13. Choose File > Save, and leave the rectangle selected.


Adjusting the direction and angle of a gradient fill
Once you have painted an object with a gradient, you can adjust the direction, the origin, and the beginning and end points of the gradient using the Gradient tool.

Now you'll adjust the gradient fill in the background shape.
1. Select the Gradient tool () in the Tools panel.

 Tip
You can hide the gradient annotator (bar) by choosing View > Hide Gradient Annotator. To show it again, choose View > Show Gradient Annotator.

The Gradient tool works only on selected objects that are filled with a gradient. Notice the horizontal gradient annotator (bar) that appears in the middle of the rectangle. The bar indicates the direction of the gradient. The larger circle on the left shows the starting point of the gradient (the first color stop), and the smaller square on the right is the ending point (the last color stop).


 Note
If you move the pointer to different areas of the gradient slider, the appearance of the pointer may change. This indicates that different functionality has been activated.

2. Position the pointer over the bar in the gradient annotator.

The bar turns into the gradient slider, much like the one found in the Gradient panel. You can use the gradient slider to edit the gradient without opening the Gradient panel.
3. With the Gradient tool, Shift-click the top of the rectangle and drag down to the bottom of the rectangle to change the position and direction of the starting and ending colors of the gradient. Release the mouse button, and then release the key.
Holding down the Shift key constrains the gradient to 45-degree angles.

4. With the Gradient tool, Shift-click below the bottom of the rectangle and drag up to just past the top of the rectangle to change the position and direction of the starting and ending colors of the gradient. Release the mouse button, and then release the key.

5. With the Gradient tool, position the pointer just off the small white square at the top of the gradient annotator. A rotation icon () appears. Drag to the right to rotate the gradient in the rectangle, and then release the mouse button.

6. Double-click the Gradient tool in the Tools panel to show the Gradient panel. Ensure that the Fill box is selected in the panel (circled in the figure), and then change the rotation angle in the Angle field to 80 and press Enter or Return.


 Note
Entering the gradient rotation in the Gradient panel, rather than adjusting it directly on the artboard, is useful when you want to achieve consistency and precision.

7. Choose Object > Lock > Selection to lock the rectangle, and then choose File > Save.

Applying and editing a gradient on a stroke
You can also apply a gradient blend to the stroke of an object. Unlike a gradient applied to the fill of an object, you cannot use the Gradient tool to edit a gradient on the stroke of an object. A gradient on a stroke, however, has more options available in the Gradient panel than a gradient fill. Next, you will add a series of colors to a stroke gradient to create a frame for the artwork.

First, you will apply a gradient to the stroke to the background rectangle with the red stroke applied, to make it look like the wood frame of a painting.
1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel and click the red stroke on the edge of the artboard to select that rectangle. Choose 18 pt from the Stroke weight menu in the Control panel.

2. Click the Stroke box at the bottom of the Tools panel and click the Gradient box below the Fill box to apply the last used gradient (the light gray to blue for the rectangle fill).

3. Click the word Transform in the Control panel. Make sure that the Constrain Width And Height Proportions is turned off (not selected). Change the Width to 14.75 in and the Height to 6.25 in.

 Note
Depending on the resolution of your screen, the Transform options may appear in the Control panel.

This will ensure that the stroke fits within the bounds of the artboard. Normally, we would simply align the stroke to the inside in the Stroke panel, but you can't do that with a gradient applied to a stroke.

4. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and drag a marquee across the upper-right corner of the selected rectangle to zoom in to it.
5. In the Gradient panel, click the Stroke box (if not already selected) circled in the figure below to edit the gradient applied to the stroke. Leave the Type as Linear, and click the Apply Gradient Across Stroke button () to change the gradient type.
You can apply a gradient to a stroke in three ways: within a stroke (default) (), along a stroke (), and across a stroke ().
6. Double-click the blue color stop on the right, and click the Swatches button () to show the swatches. Click to select the swatch named "Border 2." Click outside the panel to accept the selection.

7. Double-click the leftmost color stop, and with the Swatches button () selected, click to select the swatch named "Border 3." Press the Escape key to hide the swatches and return to the Gradient panel.
8. Position the pointer below the color ramp and between the two color stops, to add another color stop. When the pointer with a plus sign () appears, click to add another color stop like you see in the figure.
9. Double-click that new color stop and, with the swatches selected (), click the swatch named "Border 1." Press the Escape key to hide the swatches and return to the Gradient panel.

10. With the color stop still selected, change the Location to 80%.
11. Pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, drag the selected color stop to the left, closer to the leftmost color stop, release the mouse button when you see roughly 25% in the Location value, and then release the modifier key. This is an easy way to duplicate a color in a gradient.

 Tip
You can delete a color in the color ramp by selecting a color stop and clicking the Delete Stop button () or by dragging the color stop downward and out of the Gradient panel. Remember that the gradient must contain at least two colors!

12. Pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, drag the rightmost (Border 3) color stop to the left. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key when it is positioned at roughly 35%, as you see in the figure below.

13. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Creating and applying a radial gradient
As previously noted, with a radial gradient, the starting color (leftmost color stop) of the gradient defines the center point of the fill, which radiates outward to the ending color (rightmost color stop).

Next, you will create and apply a radial gradient fill to the windows of the ship (called portholes).
1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. With the Zoom tool () selected, drag a marquee across the white ellipse below the red sails on the ship to zoom in very closely.
3. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel and click the white ellipse.
4. In the Control panel, change the Fill color to the White, Black gradient. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel.
5. Click the Gradient panel icon () to show the Gradient panel (if necessary). In the Gradient panel, make sure the Fill box is selected. Choose Radial from the Type menu to convert the linear gradient in the shape to a radial gradient. Keep the ellipse selected and the Gradient panel showing.


Editing the radial gradient colors
Next, you will use the Gradient tool to adjust the colors in the radial gradient.

1. In the Gradient panel, with the ellipse still selected, click the Reverse Gradient button to swap the white and black colors in the gradient.

2. Select the Gradient tool () in the Tools panel.
3. Position the pointer over the gradient annotator (bar) in the artwork to reveal the gradient slider. Double-click the black color stop in the center of the circle to edit the color. In the panel that appears, click the Color button (), if it's not already selected. Choose CMYK from the panel menu (if necessary) and change the color values to C=22, M=0, Y=3, K=0. Press the Escape key to hide the panel.


 Note
When you double-click the color stop, you can see the Location in the panel that appears. As you build this radial gradient, you can copy the values you see in the figures to closely match the positions of the color stops.


 Note
For the next steps, we zoomed in a little further into the artwork to more easily see the color stops in the gradient.

Notice that the gradient annotator starts from the center of the ellipse and points to the right. The dashed circle around it indicates that it is a radial gradient. You can set additional options for radial gradients, as you'll soon see.
4. Position the pointer beneath the gradient slider, a little to the left of the white color stop at the right end of the color ramp. When the pointer with a plus sign () appears, click to add another color to the gradient (circled in the figure).
5. Double-click the new color stop. In the panel that appears, click the Swatches button () and select the swatch named "Window 1." Change the Location to 87%. Press the Escape key to close the panel.

6. Pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, drag the color stop you just created to the left (see the following figure for how far). Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key.
7. Double-click the new color stop, and change the Location value to 80% in the panel that appears. Press Enter or Return to change the value and hide the panel.

Once the colors are set in the gradient, you can always delete, add more, or even change the order of colors.
8. Double-click the leftmost light-blue color stop, and change the Location value to 70% in the panel that appears. Press Enter or Return to change the value and hide the panel.

9. Choose File > Save.

Adjusting the radial gradient
Next, you will change the aspect ratio of the radial gradient, adjust the position, and change the radius and the origin of the radial gradient.

1. With the Gradient tool () selected, position the pointer over the gradient annotator. Click and drag the black diamond shape () on the right, to the right, stopping just before the right edge of the ellipse shape, and release the mouse button.


 Note
You may not see the dotted circle as you drag the end of the gradient annotator. That's okay. It appears if you position the pointer over the gradient annotator bar first, before dragging the right end point.

Make sure that you still see some white on the edges of the gradient. If you don't, you can drag the diamond shape back to the left a bit. This lengthens the gradient slightly.
2. In the Gradient panel, ensure that the Fill box is selected, and then change the Aspect Ratio () to 80% by selecting it from the menu.


 Note
The aspect ratio is a value between 0.5% and 32,767%. As the aspect ratio gets smaller, the ellipse flattens and widens.

The aspect ratio changes a radial gradient into an elliptical gradient and makes the gradient better match the shape of the artwork. Another way to edit the aspect ratio is to do so visually. If you position the pointer over the gradient on the selected artwork with the Gradient tool selected, and then position the pointer over the top black circle that appears on the dotted path, the pointer changes to . You can then drag to change the aspect ratio of the gradient.
Next, you will drag the gradient slider to reposition the gradient in the ellipse.
3. With the Gradient tool, click and drag the gradient slider up a little bit to move the gradient in the ellipse. See the figure for approximately where to drag to.

4. With the Gradient tool, click the small white dot to the left of the leftmost color stop and drag to the left.

This dot repositions the center of the gradient (the leftmost color stop), without moving the entire gradient bar, and changes the radius of the gradient.
5. Choose Edit > Undo Gradient, to put the gradient back to the center.
6. Select the Selection tool () and double-click the Scale tool () in the Tools panel. Change the Uniform Scale value to 60%, and click OK.

If you transform a shape with a gradient applied, such as scale or rotate the shape (among other types of transformations), the gradient transforms as well.
7. Select the Selection tool in the Tools panel and Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the window to the right to create a copy. Position it to the right of the original, like you see in the figure.

8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Applying gradients to multiple objects
You can apply a gradient to multiple objects by selecting all the objects, applying a gradient color, and then dragging across the objects with the Gradient tool.

Now you'll apply a linear gradient fill to the sails and edit the colors in it.
1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the leftmost red sail shape. Shift-click the other red sail to the right to select both shapes.
3. In the Control panel, choose the gradient named Sails from the Fill color. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel, if necessary.

When you apply a gradient to the fill or stroke of multiple selected objects, they are applied independently.
Now you'll adjust the gradient on the shapes so that the gradient blends across all of them as one object.
4. Make sure that the Fill box at the bottom of the Tools panel or in the Swatches panel is selected.
5. Select the Gradient tool () in the Tools panel.
Notice that there is a gradient annotator (a bar) on each of the sails. This shows that by applying a gradient to multiple selected objects, the gradients are applied to each object independently.
6. Drag from the center of the leftmost sail shape to the rightmost edge of the sail on the right, as shown in the figure, to apply the gradient uniformly as a single gradient across both shapes.

7. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Adding transparency to gradients
By specifying varying opacity values for the different color stops in your gradient, you can create gradients that fade in or out and that show or hide underlying images. Next, you will apply a gradient that fades to transparent.

1. Open the Layers panel and select the Ship layer, if it isn't already selected.

2. Select the Rectangle tool () in the Tools panel and click anywhere in the Document window. In the Rectangle dialog box, change the Width to 15 in and the Height to 2 in. Click OK to create a rectangle.


 Note
The Transform panel group may open after clicking OK in the Rectangle dialog box. You can close the panel group if it does.

Since the units for the document are set to inches, you don't need to enter the "in."
3. Click the Gradient panel icon () to open the panel. Ensure that the Fill box is selected, click the Gradient menu arrow (), and then select "White, Black."

 Note
Depending on your screen resolution, you may need to click the word "Align" in the Control panel to access the Align panel.

4. Select the Selection tool () and choose Align To Artboard from the Align To menu in the Control panel (if necessary). Click the Horizontal Align Center button () and the Vertical Align Bottom button () to align the rectangle to the center and bottom of the artboard.

5. Click the Stroke color in the Control panel, and change the color to None () (if necessary).
6. Change the Angle to -90° by choosing it from the menu in the Gradient panel.
7. Double-click the white color stop in the Gradient panel. In the panel that appears, make sure that the Swatches button () is selected and select the color swatch named Water. Press the Escape key once to hide the swatches.

8. With the leftmost color stop still selected in the Gradient panel, change the Opacity to 0%.
9. Double-click the rightmost color stop (the black color). In the panel that appears, with the Swatches button () selected, select the color swatch named Water. Press the Escape key once to hide the swatches.

10. With the rightmost color stop still selected in the Gradient panel, change the Opacity to 50%.

11. Drag the gradient midpoint (the diamond shape) to the right until you see a value of approximately 60% in the Location field. Click the Gradient panel tab to collapse the Gradient panel group.

12. Choose Object > Lock > Selection.
13. Select the wood frame and choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front.
14. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Working with blended objects
You can blend two distinct objects to create and distribute shapes evenly between two objects. The two shapes you blend can be the same or different. You can also blend between two open paths to create a smooth transition of color between objects, or you can combine blends of colors and objects to create color transitions in the shape of a particular object.


When you create a blend, the blended objects are treated as one object, called a Blend object. If you move one of the original objects or edit the anchor points of the original object, the blend changes accordingly. You can also expand the blend to divide it into distinct objects.

Creating a blend with specified steps
Next, you'll use the Blend tool () to blend two shapes that will eventually make up the water beneath the ship.

1. Open the Layers panel and click the eye icon to the left of the Ship layer to hide the layer content.

2. Scroll down in the Document window so that you can see shapes off the bottom of the artboard. You will create a blend between the large and small circles.

 Tip
You can add more than two objects to a blend.

3. Select the Blend tool () in the Tools panel and position the pointer over the larger shape on the left. Click when the pointer displays an asterisk (). Then, hover over the small shape on the right until the pointer displays a plus sign (), indicating that you can add an object to the blend. Click to create a blend between these two objects.


 Note
If you wanted to end the current path and blend other objects, you would first click the Blend tool in the Tools panel, and then click the other objects, one at a time, to blend them.

4. With the blended object still selected, choose Object > Blend > Blend Options. In the Blend Options dialog box, choose Specified Steps from the Spacing menu and change the Specified Steps to 15, and then click OK.


 Tip
To edit the blend options for an object, you can also select the blend object, and then double-click the Blend tool. You can also double-click the Blend tool () in the Tools panel to set tool options before you create the blend object.

5. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel and double-click anywhere on the blend object to enter Isolation mode.
This temporarily ungroups the blended objects and lets you edit each original shape, as well as the spine (path).
6. Choose View > Outline.
In Outline mode, you can see the outlines of the two original shapes and a straight path between them. These three objects are what a blend object is composed of, by default. It can be easier to edit the path between the original objects in Outline mode.
7. Click to select the edge of the smaller shape.
You may want to zoom in (Command++ [Mac OS] or Ctrl++ [Windows]) to make it easier to select.

8. Choose View > Preview.
9. Drag the smaller shape roughly into the center of the larger shape and you will see the blend change.

10. Choose Select > Deselect and press the Escape key to exit Isolation mode.

Modifying a blend
Now you'll create another blend and edit the shape of the straight path, called the spine, which the objects blend along. You will create a blend between two copies of the blended object you just created. Blending between two objects that are also blended objects can produce unexpected results. That's why you will expand the blended object first (and understand what that means).

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the blend object. You will see the word "Blend" on the left end of the Control panel in the Selection Indicator.
2. Choose Object > Blend > Expand.
Expanding a blended object divides the blend into distinct objects, which you can edit individually like any object. The objects are grouped together by default. You can no longer edit the blended object as a single object because it has become a group of individual shapes.


 Tip
To release, or remove, a blend from the original objects, select the blend and choose Object > Blend > Release.

3. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, and then press Command+- (Mac OS) or Ctrl+- (Windows) twice to zoom out.
4. Drag the expanded group off the left edge of the artboard, like you see in the figure. Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the group off the right edge of the artboard, keeping it roughly horizontally aligned with the original.

5. Double-click the Blend tool () in the Tools panel to open the Blend Options dialog box. Change the specified steps to 16. Click OK.
6. With the Blend tool selected, position the pointer over the group off the left edge of the artboard. Click when the pointer displays an asterisk (). Then, hover over the group off the right edge of the artboard until the pointer displays a plus sign (), indicating that you can add an object to the blend. Click to blend the objects. There is now a blend between these two objects.

7. Choose View > Outline.
8. Choose Select > Deselect.
9. Select the Direct Selection tool () in the Tools panel and click the path between the groups to select it.
10. Choose Object > Path > Add Anchor Points twice to add three anchor points to the path.


 Note
You are editing the spine. However you edit the spine, the blend objects will follow.

11. Select the Pen tool () in the Tools panel. Press the Option (Mac) or Alt (Windows) key and position the pointer on the line segment between the first two anchor points. When the pointer changes in appearance, drag up a little to curve the path. Go to the next segment between the anchor points, holding down the same modifier key, and drag down. Don't create a path that is too curvy, otherwise the waves will be too tall and won't cover the background (plus, they might make the sailors on the ship seasick).

12. Drag the next segment up with the modifier key held, and so on. The idea is to create a path that curves up and down to create the effect of waves in the water. See the figure for the final effect.

13. Choose View > Preview to see the change, and then choose Select > Deselect.


 Tip
A quick way to reshape the spine of a blend is to blend the shapes along another path. You can draw another path, select the blend as well, and then choose Object > Blend > Replace Spine.


Finishing the blend
Next, you'll reposition one of the groups in the blend object, and then copy the blend object several times to create the waves in the water.

1. Select the Selection tool (), and click the blend object and choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to bring it in front of the whale tail. You may need to move the blend object to see more of the tail (we did).

2. Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the blend object up and to the right a bit. Release the mouse button and then the key to create a copy.

3. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to send it behind the original blend object and the whale tail.
4. Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the selected blend object down and to the left a bit. Release the mouse button and then the key when it looks something like the figure.

5. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to bring it in front of the original blend object.

 Tip
You can reverse a blend by choosing Object > Blend > Reverse Front To Back.

6. Double-click anywhere on the selected blend object to enter Isolation mode. Click the right group and drag it to the right and up a little bit, just beyond the farthest point of the other blend objects.
The blend object keeps the same number of steps (16) no matter where you position the two groups in the blend. The 14 copies between the original groups are just spread farther or brought closer, depending on the position of the original groups.

7. Press the Escape key to exit Isolation mode.
Make sure that the blend objects are covering the background. If you need to reposition them, go ahead.
8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.


Creating and editing a smooth color blend
You can choose several options for blending the shapes and colors of objects to create a new object. When you choose the Smooth Color blend option in the Blend Options dialog box, Illustrator combines the shapes and colors of the objects into many intermediate steps, creating a smooth, graduated blend between the original objects. If objects are filled or stroked with different colors, the steps are calculated to provide the optimum number of steps for a smooth color transition. If the objects contain identical colors, or if they contain gradients or patterns, the number of steps is based on the longest distance between the bounding box edges of the two objects.

Now you'll combine two shapes into a smooth color blend to make the ship.
1. Open the Layers panel and click the edit column to the left of the Ship layer to show the layer content. Click any disclosure triangles for layers that are displaying their contents to collapse them. Click the eye icon to the left of the Water layer to hide the contents.

2. Select the Zoom tool and click a few times to zoom in to the windows on the ship.
You will now blend the two paths that will become the ship. Both paths have a stroke color and no fill. Objects that have strokes blend differently than those that have no stroke.
3. Select the Blend tool () in the Tools panel, and position the pointer over the top line until it displays an asterisk (), and then click. Position the pointer over the bottom line, and click when a plus sign appears next to the pointer (). Leave the blend object selected.

The blend you created is using the last settings from the Blend Options dialog box (Specified Steps: 16).
Next, you'll change the blend settings for the ship so that it blends as smooth color, rather than in specified steps.
4. Double-click the Blend tool in the Tools panel. In the Blend Options dialog box, choose Smooth Color from the Spacing menu to set up the blend options, which will remain set until you change them. Select Preview, and then click OK.

5. Choose Select > Deselect.
When you make a smooth color blend between objects, Illustrator automatically calculates the number of intermediate steps necessary to create the transition between the objects. Once you've applied a smooth color blend to objects, you can edit it.
Next, you will edit the paths that make up the blend.

 Note
Creating smooth color blends between paths can be difficult in certain situations. For instance, if the lines intersect or the lines are too curved, unexpected results can occur.

6. Using the Selection tool (), double-click the color blend (the ship) to enter Isolation mode. Click on the top path to select it, and change the Stroke color in the Control panel to any color you want. Notice how the colors are blended.

7. Choose Edit > Undo Apply Swatch until the original stroke color is showing.
8. Double-click away from the blend to exit Isolation mode and deselect the ship.
9. Open the Layers panel and click the edit column to the left of the Water layer to show the contents.
10. Choose Object > Unlock All.
11. Click the bottom blend object that is a part of the waves in the water. In the Layers panel, drag the color box in the selection column straight up to the Ship layer to move the wave to the Ship layer and arrange it on top of the ship. Leave the blend object selected.


 Note
You may wish to edit the bottom blend object by double-clicking it to enter Isolation mode, then dragging the group on the right up or down or editing the spine (path) of the blend to cover the bottom of the ship. With the blend object still selected from the previous step, we selected the Direct Selection tool and clicked on the anchor point closest to the ship, then positioned the pointer over the path and dragged (up in our case) until the blend covered the bottom of the ship. This will give you a bit of practice in editing a blend object.


12. With the bottom blend object (the water) still selected, choose Object > Arrange > Send Backward a few times to send the wave blend object behind the wood border and the gradient rectangle (with the transparent green color) (if necessary). Make sure it's still in front of the ship.
13. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, and then choose Select > Deselect.

14. Choose File > Save, and then choose File > Close.

Review questions
1. What is a gradient?

2. How do you adjust the blend between colors in a gradient?
3. Name two ways you can add colors to a gradient.
4. How can you adjust the direction of a gradient?
5. What is the difference between a gradient and a blend?

Review answers
1. A gradient is a graduated blend of two or more colors or of tints of the same color. Gradients can be applied to the stroke or fill of an object.

2. To adjust the blend between colors in a gradient, with the Gradient tool () selected and with the pointer over the gradient annotator or in the Gradient panel, you can drag the diamond icons or the color stops of the gradient slider.
3. To add colors to a gradient, in the Gradient panel, click beneath the gradient slider to add a gradient stop to the gradient. Then, double-click the color stop to edit the color, using the panel that appears to mix a new color or to apply an existing color swatch. You can select the Gradient tool in the Tools panel, position the pointer over the gradient-filled object, and then click beneath the gradient slider that appears in the artwork to add a color stop.
4. Drag with the Gradient tool to adjust the direction of a gradient. Dragging a long distance changes colors gradually; dragging a short distance makes the color change more abrupt. You can also rotate the gradient using the Gradient tool and change the radius, aspect ratio, starting point, and more.
5. The difference between a gradient and a blend is the way that colors combine together—colors blend together within a gradient and between objects in a blend.







10. Using Brushes to Create a Poster

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Use four brush types: Calligraphic, Art, Bristle, and Pattern.
• Apply brushes to paths.
• Paint and edit paths with the Paintbrush tool.
• Create an Art brush from a raster image.
• Change brush color and adjust brush settings.
• Create new brushes from Adobe Illustrator artwork.
• Work with the Blob Brush tool and the Eraser tool.

This lesson takes approximately 60 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



The variety of brush types in Adobe Illustrator CC lets you create a myriad of effects simply by painting or drawing using the Paintbrush tool or the drawing tools. You can work with the Blob Brush tool, choose from the Art, Calligraphic, Pattern, Bristle, or Scatter brushes, or create new brushes based on your artwork.


Getting started
In this lesson, you will learn how to work with the different brush types in the Brushes panel and how to change brush options and create your own brushes. Before you begin, you'll restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator CC. Then you'll open the finished art file for the lesson to see the finished artwork.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See "Getting Started" at the beginning of the book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Choose File > Open, and open the L10_end.ai file in the Lesson10 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.

4. If you want, choose View > Zoom Out to make the finished artwork smaller, and then adjust the window size and leave the artwork on your screen as you work. (Use the Hand tool [] to move the artwork to where you want it in the Document window.) If you don't want to leave the artwork open, choose File > Close.
To begin working, you'll open an existing art file.
5. Choose File > Open, to open the L10_start.ai file in the Lesson10 folder in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.


 Note
In Mac OS, when opening lesson files, you may need to click the round, green button in the upper-left corner of the Document window to maximize the window's size.

6. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
7. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, name the file CruisePoster.ai and select the Lesson10 folder. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and then click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.
8. Choose Reset Essentials from the workspace switcher in the Application bar to reset the workspace.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the workspace switcher menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.


Working with brushes
Using brushes you can decorate paths with patterns, figures, brush strokes, textures, or angled strokes. You can modify the brushes provided with Illustrator and create your own brushes.



A. Calligraphic brushB. Art brushC. Bristle brushD. Pattern brushE. Scatter brush

You can apply brush strokes to existing paths, or you can use the Paintbrush tool to draw a path and apply a brush stroke simultaneously. You can change the color, size, and other features of a brush, and you can edit paths after brushes are applied (including adding a fill).
There are five types of brushes that appear in the Brushes panel (Window > Brushes): Calligraphic, Art, Bristle, Pattern, and Scatter. In this lesson, you will discover how to work with all of these except for the Scatter brush.


A. BrushesB. Brush Libraries MenuC. Libraries PanelD. Remove Brush StrokeE. Options Of Selected ObjectF. New BrushG. Delete Brush


Using Calligraphic brushes
Calligraphic brushes resemble strokes drawn with the angled point of a calligraphic pen. Calligraphic brushes are defined by an elliptical shape whose center follows the path. You can use these brushes to create the appearance of hand-drawn strokes made with a flat, angled pen tip.



Applying a Calligraphic brush to artwork
The first type of brush you'll apply to artwork is a Calligraphic brush. To get started, you'll filter the type of brushes shown in the Brushes panel so that it only shows Calligraphic brushes.

1. Click the Brushes panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to show the Brushes panel. Click the Brushes panel menu icon (), and choose List View.
2. Click the Brushes panel menu icon () again, and deselect Show Art Brushes, Show Bristle Brushes, and Show Pattern Brushes, leaving only the Calligraphic brushes visible in the Brushes panel.

 Note
A check mark next to the brush type in the Brushes panel menu indicates that the brush type is visible in the panel.

3. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and Shift-click both of the two curved purple paths above the orange/yellow shape of a ship to select both of them.

4. Click the "5 pt. Flat" brush in the Brushes panel to apply it to the purple paths.

 Note
Like drawing with an actual calligraphic pen, when you apply a Calligraphic brush, like the 5 pt. Flat brush, the more vertically the path is drawn, the thinner the path's stroke appears.

5. Change the Stroke weight to 6 pt, and change the Stroke color to White in the Control panel. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel, if necessary.

6. Choose Select > Deselect.

7. With the Selection tool, click the smaller of the white paths (the path on the right) that you just applied the brush to. Change the Stroke color to a light gray in the Control panel (we chose the color with the tool tip values C=0, M=0, Y=0, K=10).
8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Drawing with the Paintbrush tool
As mentioned earlier, the Paintbrush tool allows you to apply a brush as you paint. Painting with the Paintbrush tool creates vector paths that you can edit with the Paintbrush tool or other drawing tools. Next, you'll use the Paintbrush tool to paint waves in the water with a calligraphic brush from a default brush library.

Your waves may not look identical to what you see in the lesson, and that's okay—just have some fun.
1. With the Selection tool (), click the darker blue water shape below the ship.
2. Choose Select > Deselect.
The water shape is on a sublayer behind the ship. Selecting the water shape selects that sublayer in the Layers panel, which means that all of the waves you draw will also be on the same sublayer as the water shape.
3. Select the Paintbrush tool () in the Tools panel.

4. Click the Brush Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the Brushes panel, and choose Artistic > Artistic_Calligraphic. A brush library panel with various borders appears.
Illustrator comes with a host of brush libraries that you can use in your artwork. Each of the brush types discussed previously has a series of libraries to choose from.

5. Click the Artistic_Calligraphic panel menu icon (), and choose List View. Click the brush named "50 pt. Flat" to add it to the Brushes panel. Close the Artistic_Calligraphic brush library.
Selecting a brush from a brush library, like the Artistic_Calligraphic library, adds that brush to the Brushes panel for the active document only.
6. Change the Fill color to None (), the Stroke color to the swatch named "Dark Blue," and the Stroke weight to 1 pt (if necessary), in the Control panel.
Notice that the Paintbrush pointer has an asterisk next to it (), indicating that you are about to draw a new path.

 Note
This Calligraphic brush creates random angles on the paths, so yours may not look like what you see in the figures, and that's okay.

7. Position the pointer off the left side of the artboard, just below the ship. Paint a long, curving path from left to right, stopping about halfway across the water (see the figure). Try creating three more paths, painting from left to right, going all the way across the water. You can see the figure for ideas on how we painted.

8. Choose Select > Deselect (if necessary), and then choose File > Save.

Editing paths with the Paintbrush tool
Now you'll use the Paintbrush tool to edit a selected path.

1. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and click to select the first path you drew on the water (the one that is just below the bottom of the ship).

 Tip
You can also edit paths drawn with the Paintbrush tool using the Smooth tool () and the Path Eraser tool (), located under the Pencil tool () in the Tools panel.

2. Select the Paintbrush tool () in the Tools panel. Position the pointer near the right end of the selected path. An asterisk will not appear next to the pointer when it's positioned over a selected path. Drag to the right to extend the path all the way to the right edge of the artboard. The selected path is edited from the point where you began drawing.

3. Press and hold the Command (Mac OS) or Ctrl (Windows) key to toggle to the Selection tool, and click to select another curved path you drew with the Paintbrush tool. After clicking, release the key to return to the Paintbrush tool.
4. With the Paintbrush tool, move the pointer over some part of the selected path. When the asterisk disappears next to the pointer, drag to the right to redraw the path.
5. Choose Select > Deselect (if necessary), and then choose File > Save.
Next, you will edit the Paintbrush tool options.

6. Double-click the Paintbrush tool () in the Tools panel to display the Paintbrush Tool Options dialog box and make the following changes:
• Fidelity: drag the slider all the way to Smooth (to the right)
• Keep Selected: Selected
7. Click OK.
The Paintbrush Tool Options dialog box changes the way the Paintbrush tool functions. For the Fidelity option, the closer to Smooth you drag the slider, the smoother the path will be with fewer points. Also, because you selected Keep Selected, the paths remain selected after you finish drawing them.
8. Change the Stroke color to the swatch named "Medium Blue," and change the Stroke weight to 0.5 pt in the Control panel.
9. With the Paintbrush tool selected, paint three or four more paths from either left to right or right to left across the water shape below the ship.

Notice that, after painting each path, the path is still selected, so you could edit it if you needed to. We already deselected in the figure.
10. Double-click the Paintbrush tool in the Tools panel. In the Paintbrush Tool Options dialog box, deselect the Keep Selected option, and then click OK.
Now the paths will not remain selected after you finish drawing them, and you can draw overlapping paths without altering previously drawn paths.

 Note
When the Keep Selected option is deselected, you can edit a path by selecting it with the Selection tool () or by selecting a segment or point on the path with the Direct Selection tool (), and then redrawing part of the path with the Paintbrush tool.

11. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Editing a brush
To change the options for a brush, you can double-click the brush in the Brushes panel. When you edit a brush, you can also choose whether to change artwork to which the brush has been applied. Next, you'll change the appearance of the 50 pt. Flat brush you've been painting with.


 Tip
The Preview window in the dialog box (below the Name field) shows the changes that you make to the brush.

1. In the Brushes panel, double-click the brush thumbnail for the brush named "50 pt. Flat" to open the Calligraphic Brush Options dialog box. In the dialog box, make the following changes:
• Name: 30 pt. Flat
• Angle: 0°
• Choose Fixed from the menu to the right of Angle. (When Random is chosen, a random variation of brush angles is created every time you draw.)
• Roundness: 5% (the default setting)
• Size: 30 pt


 Note
The edits you make will change the brush for this document only.

2. Click OK.
3. In the dialog box that appears, click Leave Strokes so as not to apply the brush change to the existing waves that have the brush applied.

4. Change the Stroke color to the swatch named "Light Blue," and change the Stroke weight to 1 pt in the Control panel.

5. Click the 30 pt. Flat brush in the Brushes panel to ensure that you will paint with it applied. With the Paintbrush tool () selected, paint three paths across the water to create more waves, overlapping the existing waves. Use the figure as a guide, if you like.
6. Choose Select > Deselect, if necessary, and then choose File > Save.
The artwork should be deselected already and, if it is, the Deselect command will be dimmed (you can't select it).

Removing a brush stroke
You can easily remove a brush stroke applied to artwork where you don't want it. Now you'll remove the brush stroke on the cloud.

1. Select the Selection tool (), and click the blue cloud with the white stroke in the sky.
2. Click the Remove Brush Stroke button () at the bottom of the Brushes panel.
Removing a brush stroke doesn't remove the stroke color and weight; it just removes the brush applied.

3. Change the Stroke weight to 0 pt in the Control panel.
4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Using Art brushes
Art brushes stretch artwork or an embedded raster image evenly along the length of a path. As with other brushes, you can edit the brush options to affect how the brush is applied to artwork.



Applying an existing Art brush
Next, you will apply an existing Art brush to waves at the front of the boat.

1. In the Brushes panel, click the Brushes panel menu icon (), and deselect Show Calligraphic Brushes. Then select Show Art Brushes from the same panel menu to make the art brushes visible in the Brushes panel.
2. Click the Brush Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the Brushes panel, and choose Artistic > Artistic_Paintbrush.
3. Click the Artistic_Paintbrush panel menu icon (), and choose List View. Click the brush named "Brush 3" in the list to add the brush to the Brushes panel for this document. Close the Artistic_Paintbrush panel group.
4. Select the Paintbrush tool () in the Tools panel.
5. Change the Stroke color to White and the Stroke weight to 1 pt, and make sure that the Fill color is None () in the Control panel.

6. Click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to open the Layers panel. Click the Spray/Tree layer so that the new artwork is on that layer. Click the Layers panel icon to collapse the panel.

 Tip
With the Paintbrush pointer selected, press the Caps Lock key to see a precise cursor (X). In certain situations, this can help to paint with more precision.

7. Position the Paintbrush pointer () at the bottom-front of the ship, in the red area (marked with an X in the figure). Drag to the left along the bottom of the red strip on the ship, just along the water line. See the figure for how we painted it, and don't worry about being exact. You can always choose Edit > Undo Art Stroke and repaint the path.

8. Paint a path from the same starting point (the red X in previous figure), but drag to the right this time. Then paint a "U" shape around the starting point (from left to right) to cover any red showing. The figure shows both paths. (See the figure—start at the X in the figure for the "U" shape.)

9. Try adding a few more painted paths, always starting from the same point as the end of the original path you painted.

10. Choose File > Save.

Creating an Art brush using a raster image
In this section, you'll place a raster image, embedding it, to use in a new Art brush. When you create a new brush (for any of the brush types), it appears in the Brushes panel of the current document only.


 Note
To learn about guidelines for creating brushes, see "Create or modify brushes" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

1. Choose File > Place. In the Place dialog box, navigate to the Lesson10 folder and select the image named tree.psd. Make sure to deselect the Link option. Click Place.

2. Position the pointer off of the artboard on the right. Click to place the image.
Next, you will make an Art brush from the selected artwork. You can make an Art brush from vector artwork or from embedded raster images, but that artwork must not contain gradients, blends, other brush strokes, mesh objects, graphs, linked files, masks, or text that has not been converted to outlines.

 Note
When dealing with embedded images and brushes, there is a direct impact on the performance of the document in Illustrator. There is a fixed limit to the size of the embedded image that can be used for a brush. You may see a dialog box telling you that the image needs to be resampled before you can make a brush from it.

3. Select the Selection tool (), and click the New Brush button () at the bottom of the Brushes panel. This begins the process of creating a new brush from the selected raster artwork.

4. In the New Brush dialog box, select Art Brush, and then click OK.
5. In the Art Brush Options dialog box that appears, change the Name to Palm Tree. Click OK.
6. Delete the image you placed off the right side of the artboard, since you don't need it anymore.
7. With the Selection tool selected, click to select the curved black line to the right of the ship.
8. Click the brush named "Palm Tree" in the Brushes panel to apply it.

Notice that the original tree image is stretched along the shape. This is the default behavior of an Art brush.

Editing an Art brush
Next, you'll edit the Palm Tree Art brush and update the appearance of the palm tree on the artboard.



 Tip
To learn more about the Art Brush Options dialog box, see "Art brush options" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

1. With the curved path still selected on the artboard, double-click the brush thumbnail to the left of the text "Palm tree" or to the right of the name in the Brushes panel to open the Art Brush Options dialog box.

2. In the Art Brush Options dialog box, select Preview to see the changes as you make them and move the dialog box so you can see the curvy line with the brush applied. Make the following changes:
• Stretch Between Guides: Selected
• Start: 5 in
• End: 6 in
• Flip Across: Selected
3. Click OK.
4. In the dialog box that appears, click Apply To Strokes to apply the change to the curvy line that has the Palm Tree brush applied.
5. Click the word "Opacity" in the Control panel, and choose Multiply from the Blend Mode menu. Press Enter or Return to close the Transparency panel.

6. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Using Bristle brushes
Bristle brushes allow you to create strokes with the appearance of a natural brush with bristles. Painting with a Bristle brush, using the Paintbrush tool, creates vector paths with the Bristle brush applied, as you'll see in this section. You'll start by adjusting options for a brush to change how it appears in the artwork, and then paint with the Paintbrush tool and Bristle brush to create smoke.



Changing Bristle brush options
As you've seen, you can change the appearance of a brush by adjusting its settings in the Brush Options dialog box, either before or after brushes have been applied to artwork. In the case of Bristle brushes, it's usually best to adjust the brush settings prior to painting, since it can take some time to update the brush strokes.


 Note
To learn more about the Bristle Brush Options dialog box and its settings, see "Using the Bristle brush" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

1. In the Brushes panel, click the panel menu icon (), choose Show Bristle Brushes, and then deselect Show Art Brushes.

 Tip
Illustrator comes with a series of default Bristle brushes. Click the Brush Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the Brushes panel, and choose Bristle Brush > Bristle Brush Library.

2. Double-click the thumbnail for the default Mop brush or double-click directly to the right of the brush name to open the Bristle Brush Options dialog box for that brush. In the Bristle Brush Options dialog box, make the following changes:
• Shape: Round Fan (the default setting)
• Size: 7 mm (The brush size is the diameter of the brush.)
• Bristle Length: 150% (the default setting) (The bristle length starts from the point where the bristles meet the handle of the bristle tip.)
• Bristle Density: 20% (The bristle density is the number of bristles in a specified area of the brush neck.)
• Bristle Thickness: 75% (the default setting) (The bristle thickness can vary from fine to coarse [between 1% and 100%].)
• Paint Opacity: 75% (the default setting) (This option lets you set the opacity of the paint being used.)
• Stiffness: 50% (the default setting) (Stiffness refers to the rigidness of the bristles).

3. Click OK.

Painting with a Bristle brush
Now you'll use the Mop brush to draw some smoke above the ship. Painting with a Bristle brush can create a very organic, fluid path. In order to constrain the painting, you will paint inside a shape. This will mask (hide) part of the painting to be in the shape of smoke.

1. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click a few times, slowly, on the smoke shape above the ship (not the cloud), to zoom in on it.

2. Select the Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and click to select the smoke shape. This selects the layer that the shape is on so that any artwork you paint will be on the same layer.

 Note
To learn more about the drawing modes, see Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."

3. Click the Draw Inside button () at the bottom of the Tools panel.

 Note
If the Tools panel appears as one column, click the Drawing Modes button () at the bottom of the Tools panel, and then choose Draw Inside from the menu that appears.

4. With the smoke shape still selected, change the Fill color to None () in the Control panel (press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel). Leave the stroke as is.
5. Choose Select > Deselect to deselect the smoke shape.
The dotted lines on the corners of the shape indicate that any paths you paint will be masked by the smoke shape.

6. Select the Paintbrush tool () in the Tools panel. Choose the Mop brush from the Brush Definition menu in the Control panel, if it's not already chosen.
7. Make sure that the Fill color is None () and the Stroke color is White in the Control panel. Press the Escape key to hide the Swatches panel. Make sure that the Stroke weight is 1 pt in the Control panel.

 Tip
If you want to edit paths as you draw, you can select the Keep Selected option in the Paintbrush Tool Options for the Paintbrush tool or you can select paths with the Selection tool. You don't need to completely fill the shape.

8. Position the pointer at the top of the largest smokestack. (See the next figure for the red X.) Drag up and then down and to the left, to loosely follow the edge of the smoke shape. Release the mouse button when you reach the end of the smoke shape.
When you release the mouse button, notice that the path you just painted is masked by the smoke shape.

 Tip
If you don't like what you just painted, you can choose Edit > Undo Bristle Stroke.

9. Use the Paintbrush tool to paint more paths inside the smoke shape, using the Mop brush. Try drawing from each of the smokestacks, following the smoke shape. The idea is to fill up the smoke shape with the paths you paint.


 Note
In the first part of the figure, we dimmed the shape paths so you could more easily see the smoke paths.

10. Choose View > Outline to see all of the paths you just created when painting.
11. Choose Select > Object > Bristle Brush Strokes to select all of the paths created with the Paintbrush tool using the Mop brush.
12. Choose Object > Group, and then choose View > Preview.

13. Click the Draw Normal button () at the bottom of the Tools panel.
14. Select the Selection tool in the Tools panel. Choose Select > Deselect.

 Note
If the Tools panel appears as one column, click the Drawing Modes button at the bottom of the Tools panel, and then choose Draw Normal from the menu that appears.

15. Double-click the edge of the smoke shape to enter Isolation mode. Click the same smoke shape to select it. Change the Stroke color to None () in the Control panel.

16. Press the Escape key several times to hide the panel and to exit Isolation mode.


 Tip
You can also double-click away from the artwork to exit Isolation mode.

17. Click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to open the Layers panel. Click the eye icon () to the left of the Spray/Tree layer name to hide the artwork on that layer. Click the Layers panel icon to collapse the panel.
18. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.
When saving, you may see a warning dialog box indicating that the document contains multiple Bristle brush paths with transparency. As mentioned earlier, painting with a Bristle brush creates a series of individual vector paths with the brush applied. This can lead to issues with printing or saving to EPS/PDF or legacy versions of Illustrator documents. In order to reduce the complexity and number of the Bristle Brush paths, you can rasterize paths with a Bristle brush applied. Select the path(s) with the Bristle brush applied, and choose Object > Rasterize.

The Bristle brush and graphic tablets
When you use Bristle brush with a graphic tablet, Illustrator interactively tracks the movements of the stylus over the tablet. It interprets all aspects of its orientation and pressure input at any point along a drawing path. Illustrator provides the output that is modeled on the stylus's x-axis position, y-axis position, pressure, tilt, bearing, and rotation.
—From Illustrator Help


Using Pattern brushes
Pattern brushes paint a pattern made up of separate sections, or tiles. When you apply a Pattern brush to artwork, different tiles of the pattern are applied to different sections of the path, depending on where the section falls on the path—the end, middle, or corner. There are hundreds of interesting Pattern brushes that you can choose from when creating your own projects, from grass to cityscapes. Next, you'll apply an existing Pattern brush to a path to create windows on the ship.


1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. In the Brushes panel, click the panel menu icon (), choose Show Pattern Brushes, and then deselect Show Bristle Brushes. The Windows brush that appears in the Brushes panel is a brush that we created and saved with the file.

 Tip
Just like other brush types, there is a series of default Pattern brush libraries that come with Illustrator. To access them, click the Brush Libraries Menu button () and choose a library from one of the menus (the Decorative menu, for example).

Next, you will apply a Pattern brush and then edit its properties.
3. With the Selection tool () selected, Shift-click the two black paths on the orange shape of the ship to select them both.

4. Choose the Windows pattern brush from the Brush Definition menu in the Control panel to apply the Pattern brush.
Next, you will edit the brush properties for the selected paths.
5. Choose Select > Deselect.
6. Click the bottommost path with the Windows brush applied to select it.

7. Click the Options Of Selected Object button () at the bottom of the Brushes panel to edit the brush options for only the selected path on the artboard.
This opens the Stroke Options (Pattern Brush) dialog box.

 Tip
To change the size of the windows, you can also change the stroke weight of the lines on the artboard, with the brush applied.

8. Select Preview in the Stroke Options (Pattern Brush) dialog box. Change the Scale to 110% either by dragging the Scale slider or by typing in the value. Click OK.

When you edit the brush options of the selected object, you only see some of the brush options. The Stroke Options (Pattern Brush) dialog box is used to edit the properties of the brushed path without updating the corresponding brush.
9. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Creating a Pattern brush
You can create a Pattern brush in several ways. For a simple pattern applied to a straight line, for instance, you can select the content that you're using for the pattern and click the New Brush button () at the bottom of the Brushes panel.

To create a more complex pattern to apply to objects with curves and corners, you can select artwork in the Document window to be used in a pattern brush, create swatches in the Swatches panel from the artwork that you are using in the Pattern brush, and even have Illustrator auto-generate the Pattern brush corners. In Illustrator, only the side tile needs to be defined. Illustrator automatically generates four different types of corners based on the art used for the side tile. These four auto-generated options fit the corners perfectly.
Next, you'll create a Pattern brush for the border around the poster.
1. Choose View > Pattern objects. This should show you a zoomed-in view of the life preserver and the rope off the right edge of the artboard.
2. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the rope group.
3. Click the Brushes panel icon () to expand the panel, if necessary, click the panel menu icon (), and choose Thumbnail View. In the Brushes panel, click the New Brush button () to create a pattern out of the rope.

4. In the New Brush dialog box, select Pattern Brush. Click OK.
Notice that Pattern brushes in Thumbnail view are segmented in the Brushes panel. Each segment corresponds to a pattern tile. The side tile is repeated in the Brushes panel thumbnail preview.
A new Pattern brush can be made regardless of whether artwork is selected. If you create a Pattern brush without artwork selected, it is assumed that you will add artwork by dragging it into the Brushes panel later or by selecting the artwork from a pattern swatch you create as you edit the brush. You will see the latter method later in this section.
5. In the Pattern Brush Options dialog box, name the brush Border.
Pattern brushes can have up to five tiles—the side, start, and end tiles, plus an outer-corner tile and an inner-corner tile to paint sharp corners on a path.

 Note
Some brushes have no corner tiles because they are designed for curved paths.

You can see all five tiles as buttons below the Spacing option in the dialog box. The tile buttons let you apply different artwork to different parts of the path. You can click a tile button for the tile you want to define, and then you select an auto-generated selection (if available) or a pattern swatch from the menu that appears.

6. Under the Spacing option, click the Side Tile box (the second tile from the left). The artwork that was originally selected is in the menu that appears, along with None and any pattern swatches found in the Swatches panel. Choose Pompadour from the menu.


 Tip
Position the pointer over the tile squares in the Pattern Brush Options dialog box to see a tool tip indicating which tile it is.

In the Preview area below the tiles, you will see how the new artwork affects a path.

 Tip
Selected artwork becomes the side tile, by default, when creating a Pattern brush.

7. Click the Side Tile box again, and choose the Original option.

8. Click the Outer Corner Tile box to reveal the menu.

 Tip
To save a brush and reuse it in another file, you can create a brush library with the brushes you want to use. For more information, see "Work with brush libraries" in Illustrator Help.

The outer-corner tile has been generated automatically by Illustrator, based on the original rope artwork. In the menu, you can choose from four types of corners that are generated automatically:
• Auto-Centered. The side tile is stretched around the corner and centered on it.
• Auto-Between. Copies of the side tile extend all the way into the corner, with one copy on each side. Folding elimination is used to stretch them into shape.
• Auto-Sliced. The side tile is sliced diagonally, and the pieces come together, similar to a miter joint in a wooden picture frame.
• Auto-Overlap. Copies of the tiles overlap at the corner.
9. Choose Auto-Between from the menu. This generates the outer corner of any path that the Pattern brush will be applied to from the rope.
10. Click OK. The Border brush appears in the Brushes panel.
