 Tip
You can also enter Isolation mode to edit text by clicking the Edit Text button () in the Control panel. To exit Isolation mode, you can also click twice on the gray arrow that appears below the document tab at the top of the Document window.

5. With the text object still selected, double-click the text with the Perspective Selection tool to enter Isolation mode. The Type tool is selected automatically.
6. Double-click the word "Femme," and change the Font Size to 24 pt in the Control panel. Click the word "Character" in the Control panel, and change the Leading value to 22 pt. Press the Escape key to hide the Character panel.
7. Select all of the text, and change the Fill color to White in the Control panel.

 Note
We zoomed in to more easily edit the text.

8. Select the Selection tool () and double-click the artboard to exit Isolation mode.


Moving a plane to match an object
When you want to draw or bring objects in perspective at the same depth or height as an existing object, such as the tall box, you can bring the corresponding grid to the desired height or depth. Next, you will move the right grid plane to the same depth as the right side of the tall box and add more text to it.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the white text "LA NOUVELLE FEMME" that is off the upper-left corner of the artboard.

2. Choose Object > Transform > Rotate. In the Rotate dialog box, change the Angle value to 90° and select Preview. Click OK.
You will find that, most of the time, it's best to rotate content before bringing it into perspective.
3. Select the Perspective Selection tool () in the Tools panel. Click to select the right face of the tall box. Choose Object > Perspective > Move Plane To Match Object. Now anything you add to the right grid plane will be at the same depth as the right side of the tall box.

 Note
The gridlines on the right grid plane will most likely not cover the right side of the tall box. That's okay. Imagine that those gridlines go on forever in the same plane.

4. With the Perspective Selection tool selected, click to drag the rotated text object into the lower-left corner of the right side of the tall box. See the figure for placement help.

5. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to bring the text on top of the box.
To finish the tall box, you will add a red flower to it.
6. With the Perspective Selection tool selected, make sure that the Right Grid(3) in the Plane Switching Widget is selected.
7. Drag the last remaining red flower off the lower-left corner of the artboard onto the right side of the tall box, just above the text.
8. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to bring the flower on top of the box.
9. Choose View > Zoom In, a few times, to zoom in.
10. With the Perspective Selection tool, press Shift+Option (Mac OS) or Shift+Alt (Windows) and drag the upper-right corner of the flower shape toward the center until an approximate width of 0.5 in shows in the measurement label. Drag to position the flower like you see in the figure.

11. With the Perspective Selection tool (), click to select the white text "LA NOUVELLE FEMME" and choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front to bring it in front of the flower.
12. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
13. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Automatic plane positioning
Using the automatic plane positioning options, you can select to move the active plane temporarily when you mouse over the anchor point or gridline intersection point by pressing the Shift key.

The automatic plane positioning options are available in the Perspective Grid Options dialog box. To display this dialog box, double-click the Perspective Grid tool () or the Perspective Selection tool () in the Tools panel.
—From Illustrator Help


Adding symbols to the perspective grid
Adding symbols to a perspective plane when the grid is visible is a great way to add repeating items, such as windows. Like text, you can bring symbols into perspective. Next, you will add a symbol to one of the boxes.


 Note
Symbols that you wish to bring into perspective cannot contain such things as raster images, envelopes, or gradient meshes.

1. With the Perspective Selection tool () selected, click to select the left side of the tall box. This ensures that the correct grid plane is selected in the Plane Switching Widget, since selecting content that is attached to the grid also selects the grid plane that it is on.

 Note
To learn more about symbols, see Lesson 13, "Using Symbols to Create a Map."

2. Click the Symbols panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to expand the Symbols panel. Drag the symbol named "Orange Flower" from the Symbols panel to the left of the tall box. Notice that the flower isn't in perspective yet.

3. With the Perspective Selection tool, drag the selected symbol to the bottom of the left side of the tall box to attach it to the left grid plane.
4. Select the Zoom tool () in the Tools panel, and click several times on the symbol instance of the flower to zoom in.
5. Select the Perspective Selection tool. Press the Shift key, and drag the middle, top point down until the symbol instance fits within the side of the tall box.
6. Choose Select > Deselect.


Editing symbols in perspective
After bringing symbols into perspective, you may need to edit them. Just know that functionalities, such as replacing a symbol or breaking a link to a symbol instance, do not work on symbols in perspective. Next, you will make a change to the flower symbol.


 Note
To edit a symbol that is on the perspective grid, you can also select the symbol, and then click the Edit Symbol button () in the Control panel or double-click the symbol instance on the artboard. With either of these methods, a dialog box appears, telling you that you are about to edit the symbol definition.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. Double-click the Orange Flower thumbnail in the Symbols panel. This enters Symbol Editing mode and hides the rest of the artwork on the artboard.
3. Choose View > Outline, so it's easier to see the white text.
4. Press Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows) twice to zoom in to the grid.

5. Select the Type tool () in the Tools panel. Position the cursor over the text "PARFUM," and double-click the text to select it. Type Pencil.
6. Choose View > Preview, and then press the Escape key twice to exit Isolation mode.
7. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
Notice that the symbol instance on the left side of the tall box has updated.
8. Choose Select > Deselect (if necessary), and then choose File > Save.

Grouping content in perspective
Grouping content on the grid allows you to combine several objects into a group so that the objects are treated as a single unit, much like groups that are not in perspective. Next, you are going to group content, and then apply a drop shadow.

1. Select the Perspective Selection tool (), and position the pointer off of the lower-right corner of the shorter box. Drag a marquee selection across the right side, left side, and top of the shorter box.
2. Choose Object > Group.
By grouping content that is on the perspective grid, you release it from the grid.

 Note
When content is ungrouped, the selected object is released from the associated perspective plane and is available as normal artwork, but it doesn't affect the appearance of the artwork. Another way to release content from the grid is to choose Object > Perspective > Release With Perspective.

3. Click the Graphic Styles panel () to show the panel. Click the graphic style named Drop Shadow to apply the styling to the new group.
4. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back, and then choose Select > Deselect.

 Note
Grouping content that is on different grid planes will not allow you to move the content as a single unit in perspective.

5. With the Perspective Selection tool, Shift-click the left and right sides of the tall box, and then choose Object > Group.
6. With the group still selected, click the graphic style named Drop Shadow in the Graphic Styles panel to apply it.


Releasing content from perspective
There will be times when you want to use objects that are currently in perspective elsewhere or you want to detach an object from a grid plane. Illustrator allows you to release an object from the associated perspective plane, but it still appears to be in perspective (its appearance doesn't change).

The ad needs a smaller version of the larger box near the bottom of the ad. You will copy and paste the perspective content to release it with perspective.
1. With the Perspective Selection tool () selected, click the shorter box content to select it.
2. Choose Edit > Copy, and then choose Edit > Paste.
3. Choose Object > Transform > Scale. In the Scale dialog box, change the following options:
• Uniform: 20%
• Scale Strokes & Effects: Selected
Click OK.

4. Click the Layers panel icon () to expand the Layers panel. In the Layers panel, click the visibility column to the far left of the layer named "Other artwork." Click the Layers panel icon to collapse the panel again.
You may find that the artwork from the "Other artwork" layer that just appeared is covering part of the content on the perspective grid. You may want to reposition the content from the "Other artwork" layer after unlocking that same layer in the Layers panel.
5. Select the Selection tool (), and drag the small grouped box down to the left of the text "Order online today at our website."

6. Choose Select > Deselect.
7. Press Command+Shift+I (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows) to hide the perspective grid.
8. Choose File > Save.
9. Choose File > Close.

Review questions
1. There are three preset grids. Briefly describe what each could be used for.

2. How can you show or hide the perspective grid?
3. Before drawing content on a grid plane, what must be done to ensure that the object is on the correct grid plane?
4. What does double-clicking a grid plane control allow you to do?
5. How do you move an object perpendicular to the grid?

Review answers
1. The three preset grids are: one-point perspective, two-point perspective, and three-point perspective. A one-point perspective can be very useful for roads, railway tracks, or buildings viewed so that the front is directly facing the viewer. Two-point perspective is useful for drawing a cube, such as a building, or for two roads going off into the distance, and it typically has two vanishing points. Three-point perspective is usually used for buildings seen from above or below. In addition to vanishing points for each wall, there is a vanishing point in three-point perspective showing those walls receding into the ground or high in space.

2. You can show the perspective grid by selecting the Perspective Grid tool () in the Tools panel, by choosing View > Perspective Grid > Show Grid, or by pressing Command+Shift+I (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows). To hide the grid, choose View > Perspective Grid > Hide Grid, press Command+Shift+I (Mac OS) or Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows), or press the Escape key with the Perspective Selection or Perspective Grid tools selected.
3. The correct grid plane must be selected by choosing it in the Plane Switching Widget. You can select it by using the following keyboard commands: Left Grid(1), Horizontal Grid(2), Right Grid(3), or No Active Grid(4); or by selecting content on the grid you want to choose with the Perspective Selection tool ().
4. Double-clicking a grid plane control allows you to move the plane. You can specify whether to move the content associated with the plane and whether to copy the content as the plane moves.
5. To move an object perpendicular to the grid, with the Perspective Selection tool, hold down the number 5 key and drag the object perpendicular to the plane.







13. Using Symbols to Create a Map

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Work with existing symbols.
• Create a symbol.
• Modify and redefine a symbol.
• Use the Symbolism tools.
• Store and retrieve artwork in the Symbols panel.

This lesson takes approximately 45 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



The Symbols panel lets you apply multiple objects by painting them on the page. Symbols used in combination with the Symbolism tools offer options that make creating repetitive shapes, such as blades of grass, easy and fun.


Getting started
In this lesson, you'll add symbols to a map. Before you begin, restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator CC. Then, open the file containing the finished artwork to see what you are going to create.


 Note
On Windows, if you see a message about compatible GPU, click OK.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.
2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of this book.

3. Choose File > Open, and open the L13_end.ai file in the Lesson13 folder in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.
If you want to view the finished map as you work, choose View > Zoom Out and adjust the window size. Use the Hand tool () to move the artwork where you want it in the Document window. If you don't want to leave the finished map open, choose File > Close.

To begin working, you'll open an existing art file that is incomplete.

 Note
In Mac OS, when opening lesson files, you may need to click the round, green button in the upper-left corner of the Document window to maximize the window's size.

4. Choose File > Open, to open the L13_start.ai file in the Lesson13 folder, located in the Lessons folder on your hard disk.

5. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, name the file Map.ai and navigate to the Lesson13 folder. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or the Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings, and then click OK.
6. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

 Note
If you don't see "Reset Essentials" in the menu, choose Window > Workspace > Essentials before choosing Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials.

7. Double-click the Hand tool to fit the artboard in the window.

Working with symbols
A symbol is a reusable art object that is stored in the Symbols panel (Window > Symbols). For example, if you create a symbol from a fish you drew, you can then quickly add multiple instances of that fish symbol to your artwork, which saves you from having to draw each fish again. All instances of the fish symbol are linked to the associated symbol in the Symbols panel, so you can easily alter them using Symbolism tools.

When you edit the original symbol, all instances of the fish that are linked to it are updated. You can turn that fish from blue to green instantly! Not only do symbols save time, but they also greatly reduce file size.

 Note
The figure shows the Symbols panel with the Map.ai file displaying in the Document window.

• Click the Symbols panel icon () on the right side of the workspace. Take a minute to familiarize yourself with the parts of the Symbols panel.


A. SymbolsB. Symbol Libraries MenuC. Place Symbol InstanceD. Break Link To SymbolE. Symbol OptionsF. New SymbolG. Delete Symbol

Illustrator comes with a series of symbol libraries, which range from tiki icons to hair to Web icons. You can access those symbol libraries in the Symbols panel or by choosing Window > Symbol Libraries and easily incorporate them into your own artwork.

Using existing Illustrator symbol libraries
You will start by adding a symbol from an existing symbol library to the map.

1. Choose View > Smart Guides to deselect (turn off) the Smart Guides.
2. Click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to expand the Layers panel. Click the Symbols layer to make sure it is selected. Make sure that all of the layers are collapsed by clicking the disclosure triangles to the left of the layer names (if necessary).

When adding symbols to a document, the layer that is selected when they are added is the same layer they become a part of. In this project, some of the artwork, such as the text and the mountains, will be on top of the symbols you add since they are on the Text layer, which is above the Symbols layer.
3. Click the Symbols panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to show the panel.
4. In the Symbols panel, click the Symbol Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the panel and choose Tiki.

The Tiki library opens as a free-floating panel. This library is external to the file that you are working on, but you can import any of the symbols into the document and use them in the artwork.
5. Position the pointer over the symbols in the Tiki panel to see their names as tool tips. Click the symbol named "Tiki Hut" to add it to the Symbols panel for the document. Close the Tiki panel.


 Tip
If you want to see the symbol names along with the symbol pictures, click the Symbols panel menu icon (), and then choose Small List View or Large List View.

Every document has a default set of symbols in the Symbols panel. When you add symbols to the panel, as you just did, they are saved with the active document only.

 Tip
You can also copy a symbol instance on the artboard and paste as many as you need. This is the same as dragging a symbol instance out of the Symbols panel onto the artboard.

6. Using the Selection tool (), drag the Tiki Hut symbol from the Symbols panel onto the artboard below the "PEAKS" text, like you see in the figure. Drag another onto the artboard to the right of the "JUNGLE" text (see the figure for where to drag it), and leave it selected.
Each time you drag a symbol onto the artboard, an instance of the Tiki Hut symbol is created. Next, you will resize one of the symbol instances on the page.


 Note
The pointer that you see when dragging a symbol from the Symbols panel into the Document window may look different, and that's okay.

7. Option+Shift-drag (Mac OS) or Alt+Shift-drag (Windows) the top-middle bounding point of the selected Tiki Hut symbol instance toward the center to make it a little smaller, while constraining its proportions. Release the mouse button, and then release the modifier keys.


 Note
Although you can transform symbol instances in many ways, specific properties of instances cannot be edited. For example, the fill color is locked because it is controlled by the original symbol in the Symbols panel.

With the symbol instance still selected on the artboard, notice that, in the Control panel, you see the word "Symbol" and symbol-related options.

Editing a symbol
In this next section, you will edit the Tiki Hut symbol and all instances on the artboard will be updated. There are several ways to edit a symbol, and in this section we will focus on one.

1. With the Selection tool (), double-click the Tiki Hut symbol instance you resized. A warning dialog box appears, stating that you are about to edit the original symbol and that all instances will update. Click OK to continue.

 Tip
Another way to edit a symbol is to select the symbol instance on the artboard, and then click the Edit Symbol button in the Control panel.

This takes you into Symbol Editing mode, so you can't edit any other objects on the page. The Tiki Hut symbol instance you double-clicked may change in size. That's because you are looking at the original symbol, not at the resized symbol instance on the page. You can now edit the shapes that make up the symbol.
2. Select the Zoom tool (), and draw a marquee around the symbol content to zoom in.
3. Select the Selection tool and click to select the cream-colored shape under the house. Change the Fill color to Black in the Control panel.

4. Double-click away from the symbol content, or click the Exit Symbol Editing Mode button () in the upper-left corner of the artboard until you exit Symbol Editing mode so that you can edit the rest of the content.
5. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window, and notice that both Tiki Hut instances on the artboard have been changed.
6. Click one of the Tiki Hut symbol instances and choose Select > Same > Symbol Instance.
This is a great way to select all instances of a symbol in the document.
7. Choose Object > Group to group them together.
Next, you'll put the group you just created on the Text layer so that it's above all other artwork.
8. In the Layers panel, drag the selected art indicator to the right of the Symbols layer name (the little colored box) up to the Text layer.

9. Click the Edit column to the left of the Text layer name to lock the layer content.
10. Choose Select > Deselect (if available), and then choose File > Save, and leave the document open.


Creating symbols
Illustrator also lets you create your own symbols. You can make symbols from objects, including paths, compound paths, text, embedded (not linked) raster images, mesh objects, and groups of objects. Symbols can even include active objects, such as brush strokes, blends, effects, or other symbol instances. Now you will create your own symbol from existing artwork.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, click the sailboat group of artwork off the right edge of the artboard to select it.
2. Click the New Symbol button () at the bottom of the Symbols panel to make a symbol from the selected artwork.


 Tip
You can also drag the selected content into a blank area of the Symbols panel to create a symbol.

3. In the Symbol Options dialog box, change the name to Sailboat and choose Graphic as the Type. Click OK to create the symbol.

 Tip
By default, the selected artwork becomes an instance of the new symbol. If you don't want the artwork to become an instance of the symbol, press the Shift key as you create the new symbol.

In the Symbol Options dialog box, you will see a note that explains that there is no difference between a Movie Clip and a Graphic Type in Illustrator, and so if you do not plan on exporting this content to Adobe Flash, you don't need to worry about choosing a Type.


 Note
To learn about Align To Pixel Grid and artwork for use on the Web or for screen display, see Lesson 15, "Preparing Content for the Web."

After creating the Sailboat symbol, the sailboat artwork off the right edge of the artboard is converted to an instance of the Sailboat symbol. You can leave it there or delete it—it's up to you (we deleted it). The symbol also appears in the Symbols panel.


 Tip
You can drag the symbol thumbnails in the Symbols panel to change their ordering. Reordering symbols in the Symbols panel has no effect on the artwork. It can simply be a way to organize your symbols.

4. Drag the Sailboat symbol from the Symbols panel onto the artboard twice and position both instances like you see in the figure.

5. Try resizing one of the Sailboat symbol instances on the artboard like you did earlier (the figure shows the result after we resized one).
6. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Symbol Options
In the Symbol Options dialog box, you will encounter several options that are related to working with Adobe Flash. These options are briefly described below.
• Select Movie Clip for type. Movie Clip is the default symbol type in Flash and in Illustrator.
• Specify a location on the Registration grid where you want to set the symbol's anchor point. The location of the anchor point affects the position of the symbol within the screen coordinates.
• Select Enable Guides For 9-Slice Scaling if you want to utilize 9-Slice scaling in Illustrator or Flash.
—From Illustrator Help


Duplicating symbols
Often you will want to add a series of symbol instances to your artwork. After all, one of the reasons why we use symbols is for storing and updating frequently used content like trees or clouds. In this section, you'll create, add, and duplicate a symbol that happens to be a cloud.

1. Using the Selection tool (), click and drag the top white cloud group off the right edge of the artboard into a blank area of the Symbols panel to create a new symbol. In the Symbol Options dialog box, change the name to Cloud1 and choose Graphic as the Type. Click OK to create the symbol.

2. Drag an instance of the Cloud1 symbol from the Symbols panel to the left of "The PLURALIST" text. See the figure for placement.

Next, you will learn how to add more instances of a symbol that's already on the artboard, using a modifier key.
3. Press the Option key (Mac OS) or Alt key (Windows) and drag the Cloud1 symbol instance on the artboard to create a copy of the instance. Drag it to the right of "The PLURALIST" text. When the new instance is in position (see the figure), release the mouse button, and then release the modifier key.

4. Create four more copies by pressing the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key and dragging either of the Cloud1 symbol instances. Drag them around the map. You can see where we dragged them in the figure.

5. Resize a few of the Cloud1 symbol instances, making some smaller and some a bit larger, so they look a bit different from each other.
6. Click the Cloud1 symbol instance to the left of "The PLURALIST" text. Click the word "Transform" (or the X, Y, W, or H links) in the Control panel, and choose Flip Horizontal from the Transform panel menu ().


 Note
The figure shows the cloud before choosing Flip Horizontal.

7. Choose File > Save.

Replacing symbols
Next, you will create a symbol from some other shapes, and then replace a few of the Cloud1 symbol instances with the new symbol.

1. With the Selection tool (), select the blue cloud group off the right edge of the artboard.
2. Click the New Symbol button () at the bottom of the Symbols panel. In the Symbol Options dialog box, change the name to Cloud2 and the Type to Graphic. Click OK.

3. With the Selection tool, select the Cloud1 symbol instance to the left of "The PLURALIST" text. In the Control panel, click the arrow to the right of the Replace Instance With Symbol field to open a panel showing the symbols in the Symbols panel. Click the Cloud2 symbol in the panel.

Notice that the "Flip Horizontal" is still applied to the Cloud2 symbol instance.
4. Click another Cloud1 symbol instance on the artboard and replace it with the Cloud2 symbol using the same method.
Next, you'll edit the Cloud2 symbol using a different method.
5. Double-click the Cloud2 symbol thumbnail in the Symbols panel to edit the symbol.
A temporary instance of the symbol appears in the center of the Document window. Editing a symbol by double-clicking the symbol in the Symbols panel hides all artboard content except the symbol. This is just another way to edit a symbol.
6. Press Command++ (Mac OS) or Ctrl++ (Windows) several times to zoom in.
7. Select the Direct Selection tool () in the Tools panel and click one of the blue shapes.
8. Choose Select > Same > Fill Color to select all of the blue shapes.

 Note
The color of the path selection you see may be different than what shows in the figure and that's okay.

9. Change the Fill color in the Control panel to White.

10. Double-click away from the symbol content to exit Symbol Editing mode so that you can edit the rest of the content.
11. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

Symbol layers
When you edit a symbol using any of the methods described, open the Layers panel and you will see that the symbol has its own layering.

Similar to working with groups in Isolation mode, you see the layers associated with that symbol only, not the document's layers. In the Layers panel, you can rename, add, delete, show/hide, and reorder content for a symbol.


Breaking a link to a symbol
At times, you need to edit specific instances on the artboard—but not all instances. Because you can only make changes, like scaling, opacity, and flipping, to a symbol instance, you may need to break the link between a symbol and an instance. This breaks the instance into the original objects or group, if the symbol content was originally grouped, on the artboard.

Next, you will break the link to one of the cloud symbol instances.
1. With the Selection tool () selected, click to select the Cloud2 symbol instance to the left of "The PLURALIST" text on the artboard. In the Control panel, click the Break Link button.

This object is now a series of paths, as indicated by the words "Mixed Objects" on the left side of the Control panel and can be directly edited. You should be able to see the anchor points of the shapes. This content will no longer update if the Cloud2 symbol is edited.

 Tip
You can also break the link to a symbol instance by selecting the symbol instance on the artboard, and then clicking the Break Link To Symbol button () at the bottom of the Symbols panel.

2. Select the Zoom tool (), and drag a marquee across the selected cloud content on the artboard to zoom in.
3. Choose Select > Deselect.
4. Select the Direct Selection tool () in the Tools panel, and click the largest circle shape in the cloud.
5. Select the Selection tool and Shift-drag the top, middle bounding point up to make the circle a bit larger.

6. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Editing symbol options
Using the Symbols panel, you can easily rename or change other options for a symbol, which then updates all the symbol instances in the artwork. Next, you will rename the Tiki Hut symbol.

1. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
2. In the Symbols panel, click the Tiki Hut symbol to select it. Click the Symbol Options button () at the bottom of the Symbols panel.
3. In the Symbol Options dialog box, change the name to Wild Isles Hut and the Type to Graphic. Click OK.


Working with the Symbolism tools
The Symbol Sprayer tool () in the Tools panel allows you to spray symbols on the artboard, creating symbol sets. A symbol set is a group of symbol instances that you create with the Symbol Sprayer tool. This can be really useful if, for instance, you were to create grass from individual blades of grass. Spraying the blades of grass speeds up this process greatly and makes it much easier to edit individual instances of grass or the sprayed grass as a group. You can create mixed sets of symbol instances by using the Symbol Sprayer tool with one symbol, and then using it again with another symbol.


Spraying symbol instances
Next, you will save a tree as a symbol, and then use the Symbol Sprayer tool () to apply those trees to your illustration.

1. With the Selection tool (), click to select the dark tree off the right edge of the artboard.
2. Drag the tree into the Symbols panel. In the Symbol Options dialog box, change the name to Tree and the Type to Graphic. Click OK.
3. Choose Select > Deselect.


 Note
A higher intensity value increases the rate of change—the Symbol Sprayer tool sprays more and faster. The higher the symbol set density value, the more tightly packed the symbols are as you spray them. If you were to spray grass, for instance, you would want the intensity and density set high.

4. Double-click the Symbol Sprayer tool () in the Tools panel. In the Symbolism Tools Options dialog box, change the following options (if they aren't already set):
• Diameter: 1 in
• Intensity: 1
• Symbol Set Density: 2
5. Click OK.

6. Make sure the Tree symbol is selected in the Symbols panel. Click and drag in the map area from left to right and from right to left with the Symbol Sprayer, much like using an airbrush or a can of spray paint, to create a series of trees. You can release the mouse button at any time, and then click and drag to keep adding trees. Your trees don't have to match the figure, and if you add too many, you'll learn how to delete them next. When finished, leave the symbols selected.


 Tip
Make sure to keep moving the pointer. If you don't like the results, you can choose Edit > Undo Spraying and try again.

Notice the bounding box around the selected Tree symbol instances, identifying them as a symbol set. As you spray, the instances are grouped together as a single object. If a symbol set is selected when you begin to spray with the Symbol Sprayer tool, the symbol instances that you are spraying are added to the selected symbol set. You can easily delete an entire symbol set by selecting it and then pressing the Delete key.
7. Position the Symbol Sprayer pointer over the trees you just created. Click and release a few times to add trees one at a time.
The symbol instances are added to the existing symbol set, since the set was still selected.

8. Double-click the Tree symbol thumbnail in the Symbols panel to edit the symbol.
9. Choose Select > All and double-click the Scale tool () in the Tools panel. In the Scale dialog box, change the Uniform Scale to 80%. Click OK.

10. Select the Selection tool, and double-click away from the artwork to exit Symbol Editing mode. All of the Tree symbol instances in the symbol set have updated.
11. Choose File > Save.

Editing symbols with the Symbolism tools
There are a series of Symbolism tools that allow you to edit the size, color, rotation, and more of the instances within a symbol set. In the next steps, you will edit the trees in the Tree symbol set using one of the Symbolism tools in the Tools panel.

1. Click one of the Tree symbol instances on the artboard (on the map) to select the entire symbol set. Select the Symbol Sprayer tool () and position the pointer over one of the Tree symbol instances. Press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key, and click to delete one of the trees in the symbol set.
At this point, you could release the modifier key and click to add another Tree symbol instance if you wanted.
2. Select the Symbol Sizer tool () from the Symbol Sprayer tool () group in the Tools panel.
3. Double-click the Symbol Sizer tool, and change the Intensity to 5 in the Symbolism Tools Options dialog box. Click OK.


 Tip
If the Symbol Sizer tool is sizing too quickly, double-click the Symbol Sizer tool in the Tools panel and try lowering the Intensity and Density values in the Symbolism Tools Options dialog box.

4. Position the pointer over some of the trees, and click the mouse button to increase the size of some of the trees. In another area of trees, press the Option (Mac OS) or Alt (Windows) key while you are using the Symbol Sizer tool to reduce the size of the selected symbol instance. Make some of the trees smaller than the rest, varying the sizes.


 Tip
You can copy and paste symbol sets and use the Symbolism tools to make the duplicate sets look different.


 Note
If the clouds appear behind some of the trees, you can arrange the sublayers in the Layers panel to bring the clouds to the front of the trees.

5. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Symbolism tools
There are lots of Symbolism tools to experiment with, including the Symbol Styler tool (), which allows you to apply graphic styles to symbol instances in the symbol set. To learn more about the different types of Symbolism tools available, search for "symbolism tool gallery" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).


Storing and retrieving artwork in the Symbols panel
Saving frequently used logos or other artwork as symbols lets you access them quickly. Unfortunately, symbols you create in one document are not accessible by default in another document. You can, however, take symbols that you've created and save them as a new symbol library that you can share with other documents or users. Here are the steps for saving your symbols:
1. In the Symbols panel, click the Symbol Libraries Menu button () at the bottom, and then choose Save Symbols.
2. In the Save Symbols As Library dialog box, choose a location, such as your Desktop, where you will place the symbol library file. Name the library file and click Save.
3. You can then open another document and click the Symbol Libraries Menu button () and choose Other Library at the bottom of the menu. Navigate to the folder where you saved the library, select it, and then click Open.


Working with Creative Cloud Design Libraries
With Creative Cloud Libraries, you can organize creative assets, such as colors, type styles, brushes and graphics, and automatically sync them to Creative Cloud, allowing you to access them whenever and wherever you need them from a single, convenient panel within Illustrator. Libraries make it easy to maintain design consistency across projects, and not have to dig around in files and folders to find the assets you need.

Design Libraries are found in the Libraries panel within Illustrator CC (Window > Libraries). You can create your own libraries that always stay in sync, so you always have the most current and correct visual assets. This makes it easy to maintain design consistency across projects, and not have to dig around in files and folders to find the assets you need.
To learn more about working with Design Libraries, search for "Creative Cloud Libraries" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).


Review questions
1. What are three benefits of using symbols?

2. How do you update an existing symbol?
3. Name something that cannot be used as a symbol.
4. Name the Symbolism tool that is used for sizing symbol instances in a symbol set.
5. If you are using a Symbolism tool on an area that has two different symbols applied, which one is affected?
6. How can you access symbols from other documents?

Review answers
1. Three benefits of using symbols are:

• You can edit one symbol, and all instances are updated.
• You can map artwork to 3D objects (we didn't discuss this in the lesson).
• Using symbols reduces file size.
2. To update an existing symbol, double-click the symbol icon in the Symbols panel, double-click an instance of the symbol on the artboard, or select the instance on the artboard, and then click the Edit Symbol button in the Control panel. Then you can make edits in Isolation mode.
3. A linked image cannot be used as a symbol.
4. The Symbol Sizer tool () allows you to resize symbol instances in a symbol set.
5. If you are using a Symbolism tool over an area that has two different symbol instances, the symbol active in the Symbols panel is the only instance affected.
6. You can access symbols from saved documents either by clicking the Symbol Libraries Menu button () at the bottom of the Symbols panel and by choosing Other Library from the menu that appears; by choosing Open Symbol Library > Other Library from the Symbols panel menu; or by choosing Window > Symbol Libraries > Other Library.







14. Using Illustrator CC with Other Adobe Applications

Lesson overview
In this lesson, you'll learn how to do the following:
• Place linked and embedded graphics in an Illustrator file.
• Place multiple images at once.
• Apply color edits to images.
• Create and edit clipping masks.
• Use text to mask an image
• Make and edit an opacity mask.
• Sample color in a placed image.
• Work with the Links panel.
• Embed and unembed images.
• Replace a placed image with another and update the document.
• Package a document.

This lesson takes approximately 60 minutes to complete.
Download the project files for this lesson from the Lesson & Update Files tab on your Account page at www.peachpit.com and store them on your computer in a convenient location, as described in the Getting Started section of this book.
Your Account page is also where you'll find any updates to the chapters or to the lesson files. Look on the Lesson & Update Files tab to access the most current content.



You can easily add an image created in an image-editing program to an Adobe Illustrator file. This is an effective method for incorporating images into your vector artwork or for trying out Illustrator special effects on bitmap images.


Getting started
Before you begin, you'll need to restore the default preferences for Adobe Illustrator CC. Then you'll open the finished art file for this lesson to see what you'll create.

1. To ensure that the tools and panels function exactly as described in this lesson, delete or deactivate (by renaming) the Adobe Illustrator CC preferences file. See "Restoring default preferences" in the Getting Started section at the beginning of the book.

 Note
If you have not already downloaded the project files for this lesson to your computer from your Account page, make sure to do so now. See the "Getting Started" section at the beginning of this book.

2. Start Adobe Illustrator CC.
3. Choose File > Open. Locate the file named L14_end.ai in the Lesson14 folder in the Lessons folder that you copied onto your hard disk. This is a small poster for a vacation destination, and you will add and edit graphics in this lesson.

4. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window and leave it open for reference, or choose File > Close.

 Note
The fonts in the L14_end.ai file have been converted to outlines (Type > Create Outlines) to avoid having missing fonts.

5. Choose File > Open. In the Lessons > Lesson14 folder, select the file named L14_start.ai. Click Open. This is a small poster for a travel company, and you will add and edit graphics in this lesson.



 Note
You need an Internet connection to sync the fonts. The syncing process may take a few minutes.

6. The Missing Fonts dialog box may appear. Click Sync Fonts to sync all of the missing fonts to your computer. After they are synced and you see the message stating that there are no more missing fonts, click Close.
If you can't get the fonts to sync (a "Syncing Typekit fonts..." message doesn't go away), you can go to the Creative Cloud desktop application and choose Assets > Fonts to see what the issue may be (refer to the section "Changing font family and font style" in Lesson 7, "Adding type to a Poster," for more information on how to resolve it). You can also just click Close in the Missing Fonts dialog box and ignore the missing fonts as you proceed. A third method is to click the Find Fonts button in the Missing Fonts dialog box and replace the fonts with a local font on your machine. You can also go to Help (Help > Illustrator Help) and search for "Find missing fonts."
7. Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, navigate to the Lesson14 folder and open it. Name the file GreenIsle.ai. Leave the Format option set to Adobe Illustrator (ai) (Mac OS) or Save As Type option set to Adobe Illustrator (*.AI) (Windows), and then click Save. In the Illustrator Options dialog box, leave the Illustrator options at their default settings. Click OK.
8. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.
9. Choose Window > Workspace > Reset Essentials to reset the Essentials workspace.

Working with Adobe Bridge
Adobe Bridge CC is an application available with your Adobe Creative Cloud subscription. Bridge provides you with centralized access to all the media assets you need for your creative projects. Bridge simplifies your workflow and keeps you organized. You can batch edit with ease, add watermarks, and even set centralized color preferences. You can access Adobe Bridge from within Illustrator by choosing File > Browse In Bridge.



Combining artwork
You can combine Illustrator artwork with images from other graphics applications in a variety of ways for a wide range of creative results. Sharing artwork among applications lets you combine continuous-tone paintings and photographs with vector art. Illustrator lets you create certain types of raster images, and Adobe Photoshop excels at many additional image-editing tasks. The images edited or created in Photoshop can then be inserted into Illustrator.


 Note
To learn more about working with vector and raster images, see the "Introducing Adobe Illustrator" section in Lesson 1, "Getting to Know the Work Area."

This lesson steps you through the process of creating a composite image, including combining bitmap images with vector art and working between applications. You will add photographic images created in Photoshop to a small poster created in Illustrator. Then you'll adjust the color of an image, mask an image, and sample color from an image to use in the Illustrator artwork. You'll update a placed image, and then package the file.

Placing image files
You can bring raster artwork from Photoshop or other applications into Illustrator using the Open command, the Place command, the Paste command, and drag-and-drop operations. Illustrator supports most Adobe Photoshop data, including layer comps, layers, editable text, and paths. This means that you can transfer files between Photoshop and Illustrator without losing the ability to edit the artwork.


 Note
Illustrator includes support for DeviceN rasters. For instance, if you create a Duotone image in Photoshop and place it in Illustrator, it separates properly and prints the spot colors.

When placing files using the File > Place command, no matter what type of image file it is (JPG, GIF, PSD, etc.), it can either be embedded or linked. Embedding files stores a copy of the image in the Illustrator file, and the Illustrator file size increases to reflect the addition of the placed file. Linked files remain separate external files, and a link to the external file is placed in the Illustrator file. A linked file does not add significantly to the size of the Illustrator file. Linking to files can be a great way to ensure that image updates are reflected in the Illustrator file. The linked file must always accompany the Illustrator file, or the link will break and the placed file will not appear in the Illustrator artwork.

Placing an image
First, you will place a JPEG (.jpg) image into your document.

1. Click the Layers panel icon () to open the Layers panel. In the Layers panel, select the Pictures layer.
When you place an image, it is added to the selected layer. The layer already includes several shapes you see off the left edge of the artboard.

2. Choose File > Place.
3. Navigate to the Lessons > Lesson14 > images folder, and select the Kayak.jpg file. Make sure that Link is selected in the Place dialog box. Click Place.
The pointer should now show the loaded graphics cursor. You can see "1/1" next to the pointer, indicating how many images are being placed, and a thumbnail so you can see what image you are placing.

4. Position the loaded graphics cursor near the upper-left corner of the artboard, and click to place the image. Leave the image selected.

 Tip
The X on a selected image indicates that the image is linked (with edges showing, View > Show Edges).


The image appears on the artboard, with the upper-left corner of the image where you clicked. The image is 100% of its original size. You could also have dragged with the loaded graphics cursor to size the image as you placed it. Notice in the Control panel that, with the image selected, you see the words "Linked File," indicating that the image is linked to its source file, together with other information about the image. By default, placed image files are linked to their source file. So, if the source file is edited (outside of Illustrator), the placed image in Illustrator is updated. Deselecting the Link option while placing embeds the image file in the Illustrator file.

Scaling a placed image
You can duplicate and transform placed images just as you do other objects in an Illustrator file. Unlike vector artwork, you need to consider the resolution of the raster image content in your document, since raster images without enough resolution may look pixelated when printed. Working in Illustrator, if you make an image smaller, the resolution of the image increases. If you make an image larger, the resolution decreases. Next, you will move, resize, and rotate the Kayak.jpg image.


 Note
Transformations performed on a linked image in Illustrator, and any resulting resolution changes, do not change the original image. The changes apply only to the image within Illustrator.


 Tip
To transform a placed image, you can also open the Transform panel (Window > Transform) and change settings there.

1. Holding down the Shift key, use the Selection tool to drag the lower-right bounding point toward the center of the image until the measurement label shows a width of approximately 5 in. Release the mouse button, and then release the key.
After resizing the image, notice that the PPI (Pixels Per Inch) value in the Control panel is approximately 150. PPI refers to the resolution of the image. Other transformations like rotation can also be applied to images using the various methods you learned in Lesson 4, "Transforming Artwork."


 Tip
Much like other artwork, you can also Option+Shift-drag (Mac OS) or Alt+Shift-drag (Windows) a bounding point around an image to resize from the center, while maintaining the image proportions.

2. Click the "Linked File" link on the left end of the Control panel to see the Links panel. With the Kayak.jpg file selected in the Links panel, click the Show Link Info arrow in the lower-left corner of the panel to see information about the image. You can see the percentage that the image was scaled as well as rotation information, size, and much more.

3. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Placing a Photoshop image with Show Import Options
When you place image files in Illustrator, you have the ability to change image options when the file is imported (when available). For instance, if you place a Photoshop file (.psd), you can choose to flatten the image or even to preserve the layers in the file.

Next, you will place a Photoshop file, set import options, and embed it in the Illustrator file.
1. In the Layers panel, click the eye icon () for the Pictures layer to hide the contents, and then select the Background layer.

2. Choose File > Place.
3. In the Place dialog box, navigate to the Lessons > Lesson14 > images folder and select the Lilypads.psd file. In the Place dialog box, set the following options:
• Link: Deselected (Deselecting the Link option embeds an image file in the Illustrator file. Embedding the Photoshop file allows for more options when it is placed, as you'll see.)
• Show Import Options: Selected

 Note
You may not see a preview for the Photoshop file, even though the figure shows one, and that's okay.

4. Click Place.

The Photoshop Import Options dialog box appears because you selected Show Import Options in the Place dialog box.

 Note
Even though you select Show Import Options in the Place dialog box, the Import Options dialog box will not appear if the image doesn't have any options to change.

5. In the Photoshop Import Options dialog box, set the following options:

 Tip
To learn more about layer comps, see "Importing artwork from Photoshop" in Illustrator Help (Help > Illustrator Help).

• Layer Comp: All (A layer comp is a snapshot of a state of the Layers panel that you create in Photoshop. In Photoshop, you can create, manage, and view multiple versions of a layout in a single Photoshop file.)
• Show Preview: Selected (Preview displays a preview of the selected layer comp.)
• Convert Layers To Objects: Selected (This option and the next one are only available because you deselected the Link option and chose to embed the Photoshop image.)
• Import Hidden Layers: Selected (to import layers hidden in Photoshop)

6. Click OK.

 Note
A color mode warning may appear in the Photoshop Import Options dialog box. This indicates that the image you are placing may not be the same color mode as the Illustrator document. For this image (and going forward), if a color warning dialog box appears, click OK to dismiss it.

7. Position the loaded graphics cursor in the upper-left corner of the artboard. When the green word "intersect" appears (that's a part of the Smart Guides), click to place the image.

 Note
The word "intersect" may be hidden by the top edge of the Document window.

Rather than flatten the file, you have converted the Lilypads.psd Photoshop layers to layers that you can show and hide in Illustrator. When placing a Photoshop file in particular, if you had left the Link option selected (to link to the original PSD file), the only option in the Options section of the Photoshop Import Options dialog box would have been to flatten the content.

8. In the Layers panel, click the Locate Object button () to reveal the image content in the Layers panel. You may want to drag the left edge of the Layers panel to see more of the layer names.

Notice the sublayers of Lilypads.psd. These sublayers were Photoshop layers in Photoshop and appear in the Layers panel in Illustrator because you chose not to flatten the image when you placed it. Also notice that, with the image still selected on the page, the Control panel shows the word "Group" on the left side and includes an underlined link to "Multiple Images." When you place a Photoshop file with layers and you choose to convert the layers to objects in the Photoshop Import Options dialog box, Illustrator treats the layers as separate sublayers in a group. This particular image had a layer mask in Photoshop applied to Layer 0, which is why the image appears to fade.
9. Click the eye icon () to the left of the "Color Fill 1" sublayer to hide it.

10. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Placing multiple images
In Illustrator you can also place multiple files in a single action. Next, you'll place two images at once and then position them.

1. In the Layers panel, click the disclosure triangle () to the left of the Background layer to collapse the layer contents. Click the visibility column of the Pictures and the Text layers to show the contents for each, and then ensure that the Background layer is selected.

2. Choose File > Place.
3. In the Place dialog box, select the Water.jpg file in the images folder inside the Lesson14 folder. Command-click (Mac OS) or Ctrl-click (Windows) the image named Text.psd to select both image files. Deselect the Show Import Options option and make sure that the Link option is not selected. Click Place.


 Tip
You could also select a range of files in the Place dialog box by pressing the Shift key.


 Note
The Place dialog box may show the images in a different view, like a List view, and that's okay.

4. Position the loaded graphics cursor on the left side of the artboard. Press the Right or Left Arrow key (or Up and Down Arrow keys) a few times to see that you can cycle between the image thumbnails. Whichever thumbnail is showing when you click in the Document window is placed. Make sure that you see the water image thumbnail, and click the left edge of the artboard, about halfway down, to place the image.


 Note
The figure shows after clicking to place the Water.jpg image.


 Tip
To discard an asset that is loaded and ready to be placed, use the arrow keys to navigate to the asset, and then press the Escape key.

5. Press and hold the spacebar and drag to the left so that you see more area off the right side of the artboard.
6. Position the loaded graphics off the right side of the artboard. Click and drag down and to the right, stopping when the image is roughly as big as you see in the figure. Leave the image selected.

You can either click to place an image at 100% or click and drag to place an image and size it as you place it in the Document window. By dragging when you place an image, you are resizing the image. Resizing an image in Illustrator will most likely result in a different resolution than the original. Once again, you can look at the PPI (Pixels Per Inch) value in the Control panel to see the resolution of the image. The original PPI of the Text.psd image was 150 PPI.
7. With the Text.psd image selected, drag the selected art indicator (the colored box) in the Layers panel up to the Text layer to move the image to the Text layer.

8. Choose View > Fit Artboard In Window.

Applying color edits to an image
In Illustrator, you can convert images to a different color mode (such as RGB, CMYK, or grayscale) or adjust individual color values. You can also saturate (darken) or desaturate (lighten) colors or invert colors (create a color negative).

In order to edit colors in the image, the image needs to be embedded in the Illustrator file. If the file is linked, you can edit the image in Photoshop and then update it in Illustrator.
1. In the Layers panel, click the eye icons () in the visibility column for the Pictures and Text layers to hide their contents.
2. With the Selection tool (), click to select the Lilypads.psd image at the top of the artboard. Choose Edit > Edit Colors > Adjust Color Balance.
3. In the Adjust Colors dialog box, drag the sliders or enter values for the CMYK percentages to change the colors in the image. You can press Tab to move between the text fields. We used the following values to create more of a red cast:
• C= 5
• M= -25
• Y= 10
• K= 0
Feel free to experiment a little. Select Preview so that you can see the color changes. Click OK.


 Note
If you later decide to adjust the colors of the same image by choosing Edit > Edit Colors > Adjust Color Balance, the color values will be set to 0 (zero).


 Note
To see the results, you may need to select and deselect Preview as you change options in the Adjust Colors dialog box.

4. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.
5. In the Layers panel, click the visibility column for the Pictures and Text layers to show their contents. Click the eye icon () in the visibility column for the Background layer to hide its contents.

Masking images
Clipping paths, or masks, crop an image so that only a portion of the image appears through the shape of the mask. Only vector objects can be clipping paths; however, any artwork can be masked. You can also import masks created in Photoshop files. The clipping path and the masked object are referred to as the clipping set.


Applying a simple mask to an image
In this short section, you'll create a simple clipping mask for the Kayak.jpg image.

1. With the Selection tool (), click the Kayak.jpg image to select it (the first image you placed). Click the Mask button in the Control panel.

 Note
You can also apply a clipping mask by choosing Object > Clipping Mask > Make.

Clicking the Mask button applies a clipping mask to the image in the shape and size of the image.

 Tip
Another way to create a mask is to use the Draw Inside mode. This mode allows you to draw inside the selected object. The Draw Inside mode can eliminate the need to perform multiple tasks, such as drawing and altering stacking order or drawing, selecting, and creating a clipping mask. To learn more about the drawing modes, see Lesson 3, "Using Shapes to Create Artwork for a Postcard."


 Note
You may need to drag the left edge of the Layers panel to the left to see more of the names, like we did for the figure.

2. In the Layers panel, click the Locate Object button () at the bottom of the panel.
Notice the <Clipping Path> and <linked File> sublayers that are contained within the <Clip Group> sublayer. The <Clipping Path> object is the clipping path that was created, and the <Clip Group> is a set that contains the mask and the object that is masked (the linked image).

Next, you will edit this simple mask.

Editing a clipping path (mask)
In order to edit a clipping path, you need to be able to select it. Illustrator offers several ways to do this.

1. With the kayak image still selected on the artboard, click the Edit Contents button () in the Control panel and, in the Layers panel, notice that the <Linked File> sublayer (in the <Clip Group>) is showing the selected-art indicator (small color box) to the far right of the sublayer name.


 Tip
You can also double-click a clip group (object masked with a clipping path) to enter Isolation mode. You can then either click the masked object (the image in this case) to select it or click the edge of the clipping path to select the clipping path. After you are finished editing, you can then exit Isolation mode using a variety of methods we discussed in previous lessons (like pressing the Escape key).

2. Click the Edit Clipping Path button () in the Control panel, and notice that the <Clipping Path> is showing the selected-art indicator in the Layers panel.
When an object is masked, you can edit the mask, the object that is masked, or both. Use these two buttons to select which to edit. When you first click to select an object that is masked, you will edit both the mask and the masked object.
3. With the Edit Clipping Path button () selected in the Control panel, choose View > Outline.

 Tip
You can also edit a clipping path with transformation options, like rotate, skew, etc., or by using the Direct Selection tool ().

4. Use the Selection tool () to drag the top, middle bounding point of the selected mask down until the measurement label shows a height of approximately 3.25 in.

5. Choose View > Preview.
6. Click the word Transform (or X, Y, W, or H) in the Control panel (or open the Transform panel [Window > Transform]) and ensure that the center of the Reference Point is selected. Make sure that the Constrain Width And Height Proportions is off, and change the Width to 3.5 in. If you see that the Height is not 3.25 in, go ahead and make it so.

7. In the Control panel, click the Edit Contents button () to edit the Kayak.jpg image, not the mask. With the Selection tool, be careful to drag from within the bounds of the mask, down a little bit, and release the mouse button. Notice that you are moving the image and not the mask.
With the Edit Contents button () selected, you can apply many transformations to the image, including scaling, moving, rotating, and more.


 Tip
You can also press the arrow keys on the keyboard to reposition the image.

8. Choose Select > Deselect, and then click the image again to select the entire clip group. Drag the image onto the light gray rectangle and position it like you see in the figure.

9. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Masking an object with text
In this section, you'll create a mask in the shape of text for another image you place. In order to create a mask from text, the text needs to be on top of the image, as you'll see.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, drag the leaf image (Text.psd) from off the right side of the artboard on top of the "ISLE" text.

 Note
If the Text.psd image is not as wide as the "ISLE" text, make sure you resize the image, holding down the Shift key to constrain the proportions.

2. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back. You should see the "ISLE" text now. Make sure that the image is positioned roughly like you see in the figure.

 Tip
You can also choose Object > Clipping Mask > Make.

3. With the image still selected, Shift-click the "ISLE" text to select them both. Right-click over the selected content and choose Make Clipping Mask from the context menu.

You can edit the Text.psd image and the clipping mask separately, just as you did previously with the masked Kayak.jpg image.

 Tip
You can use shapes or compound paths as a clipping mask, if you like. Just create the artwork, ensure that it's on top of the content to be masked, and then choose Object > Clipping Mask > Make.

4. With the text still selected, open the Graphic Styles panel (Window > Graphic Styles) and select the Text Shadow graphic style to apply a drop shadow.

5. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Masking an object with multiple shapes
You can easily create a mask from either a single shape or multiple shapes. In order to create a clipping mask with multiple shapes, the shapes first need to be converted to a compound path. This can be done by selecting the shapes that will be used as the mask and choosing Object > Compound Path > Make.


Creating an opacity mask
An opacity mask is different from a clipping mask, because it allows you to mask an object and alter the transparency of artwork. You can make and edit an opacity mask using the Transparency panel.

In this section, you'll create an opacity mask for the Water.jpg image so that it fades into the blue color of the background shape.
1. In the Layers panel, click the disclosure triangles for all layers () to collapse the contents, if necessary. Click the visibility column to the left of the Background layer to see its contents. Click the eye icon () to the left of the Pictures and Text layers to hide their contents.

2. With the Selection tool selected, click the water image on the artboard. Choose Align To Artboard from the Align To menu, if necessary, in the Control panel. Click the Horizontal Align Center button () and then the Vertical Align Center button () in the Control panel to align the image to the artboard.

3. Select the Rectangle tool () in the Tools panel, and click in the approximate center of the artboard. In the Rectangle dialog box, change the Width to 9 in and the Height to 8 in. Click OK. This will become the mask.

4. Press the letter "D" to set the default stroke (black, 1pt) and fill (white) for the new rectangle.
5. Select the Selection tool (), and with the rectangle selected, click the Horizontal Align Center button () and then the Vertical Align Bottom button () in the Control panel to align the rectangle to the bottom, center of the artboard.

6. Press the Shift key, and click the Water.jpg image to select it as well.
7. Click the Transparency panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to expand the Transparency panel. Click the Make Mask button and leave the artwork selected.

 Note
The object that is to become the opacity mask (the masking object) needs to be the top selected object in the artboard. If it is a single object, like a rectangle, it does not need to be a compound path. If the opacity mask is to be made from multiple objects, they need to be grouped.


 Note
If you wanted to create a mask that was the same dimensions as the image, instead of drawing a shape, you could have simply clicked the Make Mask button in the Transparency panel.

After clicking the Make Mask button, the button now shows as "Release." If you were to click the button again, the image would no longer be masked.


Editing an opacity mask
Next, you'll adjust the opacity mask that you just created.

1. In the Transparency panel, Shift-click the mask thumbnail (as indicated by the white rectangle on the black background) to disable the mask.


 Tip
To disable and enable an opacity mask, you can also choose Disable Opacity Mask or Enable Opacity Mask from the Transparency panel menu.

Notice that a red X appears on the mask in the Transparency panel and that the entire Water.jpg image reappears in the Document window.
2. In the Transparency panel, Shift-click the mask thumbnail to enable the mask again.

 Tip
To show the mask by itself (in grayscale if the original mask had color in it) on the artboard, you can also Option-click (Mac OS) or Alt-click (Windows) the mask thumbnail in the Transparency panel.

3. Click to select the mask thumbnail on the right side of the Transparency panel.

Clicking the opacity mask in the Transparency panel selects the mask (the rectangle path) on the artboard. If the mask isn't selected, click to select it with the Selection tool (). With the mask selected, you can't edit other artwork on the artboard. Also, notice that the document tab shows (<Opacity Mask>/Opacity Mask), indicating that you are now editing the mask.
4. Click the Layers panel icon () on the right side of the workspace to reveal the Layers panel.
In the Layers panel, notice that the layer <Opacity Mask> appears, indicating that the mask—rather than the artwork that is being masked—is selected.

5. With the mask selected in the Transparency panel and on the artboard, in the Control panel, click the Fill color and select a white-to-black linear gradient, called "White, Black."

You will now see that where there is white in the mask, the Water.jpg image is showing, and where there is black, it is hidden. The gradient mask gradually reveals the image.
6. Make sure that the Fill box (toward the bottom of the Tools panel or in the Swatches panel) is selected.
7. Select the Gradient tool () in the Tools panel. Holding down the Shift key, position the pointer close to the bottom of the Water.jpg image. Click and drag up to just below the top of the mask shape, as shown in the figure. Release the mouse button, and then release the Shift key.

8. Click the Transparency panel icon (), and notice how the mask has changed appearance in the Transparency panel.
Next, you'll move the image but not the opacity mask. With the image thumbnail selected in the Transparency panel, both the image and the mask are linked together by default, so that if you move the image, the mask moves as well.

 Note
You have access to the link icon only when the image thumbnail, not the mask thumbnail, is selected in the Transparency panel.

9. In the Transparency panel, click the image thumbnail so that you are no longer editing the mask. Click the link icon () between the image thumbnail and the mask thumbnail. This allows you to move just the image or the mask, but not both.


 Note
The position of the Water.jpg does not have to match the figure exactly.

10. With the Selection tool, begin dragging the Water.jpg image down. As you drag, press and hold the Shift key to constrain the movement vertically. After you drag a little, release the mouse button, and then release the Shift key to see where it is positioned.

11. In the Transparency panel, click the broken link icon () between the image thumbnail and the mask thumbnail to link the two together again.
12. Choose Object > Arrange > Send To Back to send the Water.jpg image behind the Lilypads.psd image. It won't look like anything has changed on the artboard, but later you will attempt to select the Lilypads.psd image and it will need to be on top of the Water.jpg image.
13. Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Sampling colors in placed images
You can sample, or copy, the colors in placed images to apply the colors to other objects in the artwork. Sampling colors enables you to easily make colors consistent in a file that combines images and Illustrator artwork.

1. In the Layers panel, make sure that all of the layers are collapsed, and then click the visibility column to the left of the Text and Pictures layers to show the layer contents on the artboard.

2. With the Selection tool () selected, click the "green" text.
3. Make sure that the Fill box (toward the bottom of the Tools panel) is selected.

 Note
Using the Shift key with the Eyedropper tool allows you to apply only the sampled color to the selected object. If you don't use the Shift key, you apply all appearance attributes to the selected object.

4. Select the Eyedropper tool () in the Tools panel, and Shift-click a green area in the one of the lily pads to sample and apply a green color to the text. You can try sampling the color of different images and content, if you want. The color you sample is applied to the selected text.

5. Choose Select > Deselect.

Working with image links
When you place images in Illustrator and either link to them or embed them, you can see a listing of these images in the Links panel. You use the Links panel to see and manage all linked or embedded artwork. The Links panel displays a small thumbnail of the artwork and uses icons to indicate the artwork's status. From the Links panel, you can view the images that have been linked to and embedded, replace a placed image, update a linked image that has been edited outside of Illustrator, or edit a linked image in the original application, such as Photoshop.


Finding link information
When you place an image, it can be helpful to see where the original image is located, what transformations have been applied to the image (such as rotation and scale), and more information. Next, you will explore the Links panel to discover image information.

1. Choose Window > Links to open the Links panel.
Looking in the Links panel, you will see a listing of all of the images you've placed. Images with a name to the right of the image thumbnail are linked, and those images without a name are embedded. You can also tell if an image has been embedded by the embedded icon ().

 Note
You can also double-click the image in the Layers panel list to see the image information.

2. Scroll in the panel, if necessary, and select the Kayak.jpg image (which shows the name to the right of the thumbnail). Click the toggle arrow in the lower-left corner of the Layers panel to reveal the link information at the bottom of the panel.
You will see information, such as the name, original location of the image, the file format, resolution, modification and creation dates, transformation information, and more.


 Tip
Another way to access the Links panel for a linked image is to click the orange text "Linked File" in the Control panel to open the Links panel. If you select a linked image or the image content of a Clip Group, you will see the text "Linked File."

3. Click the Go To Link button () below the list of images. The Kayak.jpg image will be selected and centered in the Document window. The word "Linked File" will appear in the Selection Indicator of the Control panel (on the left end).

4. In the Control panel, click the file name Kayak.jpg to reveal a menu of options.
The menu of options that appears mirrors those options found in the Links panel. If you were to select an embedded image, you would instead see the link named Embedded in the Control panel. Clicking that orange link would show the same menu options but some of them would be inaccessible.
5. Press the Escape key to hide the menu and leave the Kayak.jpg image selected.

Embedding and unembedding images
As was mentioned previously, if you choose not to link to an image when placing it, the image is embedded in the Illustrator file. That means that the image data is stored within the Illustrator document. You can choose to embed an image later, after placing and linking to it, if you choose. Also, you might want to use embedded images outside of Illustrator or to edit them in an image-editing application like Photoshop. Illustrator allows you to unembed images, which saves the embedded artwork to your file system as a PSD or TIFF file (you can choose) and automatically links it to the Illustrator file. Next, you will embed an image in the document.


 Note
Neither 1-bit images nor images that are either locked or hidden can be unembedded.

1. With the Kayak.jpg image still selected, click the Embed button in the Control panel to embed the image.

The link to the original image file is removed, and the image data is embedded in the Illustrator document. Visually, you can tell the image is embedded because it no longer has the X going through the middle of it (with the image selected and edges showing [View > Show Edges]) and an embed icon () appears in the Layers panel to the far right of the name.

 Note
Certain file formats, like PSD, show an Import Options dialog box when you embed the image, allowing you to select placement options.

With an image embedded, you may realize that you need to make an edit to that image in a program like Adobe Photoshop. You can just as easily unembed an image, which is what you'll do next to the Kayak.jpg image.
2. With the Kayak.jpg image still selected on the artboard, click the Unembed button in the Control panel. You can also choose Unembed from the Links panel menu ().

 Note
The embedded Kayak.jpg image data is unembedded from the file and saved as a TIFF file in the images folder. The kayak image on the artboard is now linked to the TIFF file.

3. In the Unembed dialog box, navigate to the Lessons > Lesson14 > images folder (if you are not already there). Choose File Format (Mac OS) or TIFF (*.TIF) from the Save As Type (Windows) menu and click Save.


Replacing a linked image
You can easily replace a linked or embedded image with another image to update the artwork. The replacement image is positioned exactly where the original image was, so no adjustment should be necessary if the new image is of the same dimensions. If you scaled the image that you are replacing, you may need to resize the replacement image to match the original. Next, you will replace several images.

1. With the Selection tool () selected, drag the gradient-filled rectangle off the left edge of the artboard on top of the Kayak.tif image, centering it on the image using Smart Guides.

2. Choose Object > Arrange > Bring To Front.
3. In the Layers panel, click the edit column to the left of the Background layer to lock the layer content on the artboard.
4. Drag across the Kayak.tif image and the light-gray rectangle beneath it to select the artwork. Choose Object > Group.
5. Drag the new group up so that its top aligns with the top of the artboard.
6. Option-drag (Mac OS) or Alt-drag (Windows) the group down to create a copy (see the figure below for approximately where to drag it).

7. Repeat this two more times so that you have four image groups on the artboard and they are positioned roughly like you see in the following figure.
In the Links panel, you will see a series of Kayak.tif images listed in the panel. Next, you will replace the images and then rotate the pictures.
8. Click the second group from the top on the artboard. In the Links panel, with one of the Kayak.tif images selected, click the Relink button () below the list of images.

9. In the Place dialog box, navigate to the Lessons > Lesson14 > images folder and select People.psd. Make sure that the Link option is selected. Click Place to replace the kayak image with the People.psd image.

 Tip
The new image is masked in the same shape. If you need to edit either the image or the clipping path, you could click the Edit Contents button () or the Edit Clipping Path button () in the Control panel.


When you replace an image, any color adjustments made to the original image are not applied to the replacement. However, masks applied to the original image are preserved. Any layer modes and transparency adjustments that you've made to other layers also may affect the image's appearance.
10. Click the third group from the top on the artboard. In the Links panel, with one of the Kayak.tif selected, click the Relink button () below the list of images.
11. In the Place dialog box, navigate to the Lessons > Lesson14 > images folder and select Hiking.jpg. Make sure that the Link option is selected. Click Place to replace the kayak image with the new image.

12. Click the bottom group. In the Links panel, with one of the Kayak.tif images selected, click the Relink button () below the list of images.
13. In the Place dialog box, navigate to the Lessons > Lesson14 > images folder and select Snorkel.psd. Make sure that the Link option is selected. Click Place to replace the kayak image with the Snorkel.psd image.

14. Choose Select > Deselect. Click the top image group with the Kayak.tif image. Position the pointer just off the upper-right corner and when you see the rotate arrows (), click and drag to the left until you see approximately 10° in the measurement label.

15. Click the group with the People.psd image just below the top group and rotate the group to the right, until you see approximately -5° in the measurement label. Rotate the Hiking.jpg group to the left until you see approximately 10° in the measurement label. Rotate the Snorkel.psd image group to the right until you see approximately -10° in the measurement label.


 Note
The figure shows rotating the final image group.

16. Choose File > Save.

Packaging a file
When you package a file, you create a folder that contains a copy of the Illustrator document, any necessary fonts, copies of the linked graphics, and a report that contains information about the packaged files. This is an easy way to hand off all necessary files for an Illustrator project. Next, you will package the poster files.


 Note
If the file needs to be saved, a dialog box will appear to notify you.

1. Choose File > Package. In the Package dialog box, set the following options:
• Click the folder icon () and navigate to the Lesson14 folder, if you are not already there. Click Choose (Mac OS) or Select Folder (Windows) to return to the Package dialog box.
• Folder name: GreenIsle (remove "_Folder" from the name)
• Options: Leave at default settings.
2. Click Package.

 Note
The Create Report option, when selected, will create a package report (summary) in the form of a .txt (text) file, which by default is placed in the package folder.

The Copy Links option copies all of the linked files to the new folder it creates. The Collect Links In Separate Folder option creates a folder called Links and copies the links into there. The Relink Linked Files To Document option updates the links within the Illustrator document to link to the new copies.

3. In the next dialog box that discusses font-licensing restrictions, click OK. Clicking Back would allow you to deselect Copy Fonts Used In Document (Except CJK & Typekit fonts).
4. In the final dialog box to appear, click Show Package to see the package folder.
